===== Page 1 =====
CDC’s National Violent Death 
Reporting System (NVDRS)
Violence is a Major Public Health Problem
In the United States, seven people per hour die a violent death. More than 19,100 people were victims of homicide 
and almost 47,500 people died by suicide in 2019 alone. The economic costs are staggering—with suicide costing 
the U.S. economy $68 billion and homicide $36 billion, and this is just the costs for medical care and lost work. Other 
costs, including the emotional toll on victims’  families and the costs to the criminal justice system for arrest and 
incarceration of offenders are substantial and not included in this estimate. Also, many Americans survive violent 
experiences and are left struggling with long-term physical, psychological, and emotional consequences. Violence 
erodes entire communities—reducing productivity, decreasing property values, disrupting social services, and making 
people feel unsafe in the places where they live, work, and learn. 
A Comprehensive  
Look at Violent Deaths
NVDRS covers all types of violent deaths—including 
homicides and suicides—in all settings and for all age 
groups. NVDRS includes over 600 unique data elements 
that provide valuable context about violent deaths such 
as relationship problems; mental health problems and 
treatment; toxicology results; and life stressors, including 
recent problems with a job, finances, or physical health 
problems. Extensive information about the incidents, such 
as weapons used, characteristics of suspects, and locations 
where they occurred are included. Such data are far more 
comprehensive than what is available elsewhere.
Linking Data to  
Get the Whole Story
To help find answers to prevent violent deaths, we need 
to know the facts. CDC’s NVDRS links information about 
the “who, when, where, and how” from data on violent 
deaths and provides insights about “why” they occurred. 
Frontline investigators including law enforcement, coroners, 
and medical examiners collect valuable information about 
violent deaths. However, these data are seldom combined 
in a systematic manner to provide a complete picture.
NVDRS provides a clearer understanding of violent deaths. 
NVDRS is the only state-based surveillance (reporting) 
system that pools data on violent deaths and their 
circumstances from multiple sources into one anonymous 
database. No personally identifiable information is collected. 
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control 
Division of Violence Prevention
===== Page 2 =====
What NVDRS Can Do
• Inform decision makers and program planners
about the magnitude, trends, and characteristics
of violent deaths.
• Educate your community about circumstances
that contribute to violence in your county, state,
or territory.
• Develop and tailor violence prevention efforts
to maximize benefits.
• Evaluate the impact of prevention programs
and strategies.
Accessing NVDRS
CDC’s Injury Center distributes information from 
NVDRS at the state and national level in both 
summary and topic-specific reports. 
NVDRS data are stored in an incident-based 
database. Descriptive data can be accessed free of 
charge from Web-Based Injury Statistics Query 
And Reporting System (WISQARS). 
What Makes NVDRS Unique
Other data systems mainly count deaths and provide basic 
demographic information. In contrast, NVDRS:
• Gathers and links detailed investigative information
from several sources, including law enforcement,
medical examiners and coroners, toxicology, and
death certificates. With this linked information, NVDRS
is able to provide a more complete picture of the
circumstances that contribute to violent deaths.
• Helps identify emerging issues, such as
veteran suicide.
• Combines data about deaths that occurred during
the same violent event to help identify circumstances
of multiple homicides or homicides followed by the
suicide of the homicide suspect.
• Collects information on the suspect and the
relationship of the victim to the suspect to better
characterize homicides.
CDC provides technical assistance for NVDRS  
in the form of manuals and complementary resources. 
For further information on NVDRS, visit  
www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/datasources/
nvdrs/index.html
The Reach of NVDRS
NVDRS began collecting data on violent 
deaths from six states in 2002, followed 
by progressive additions to the system 
over several years. In 2018, NVDRS was 
expanded to include data collection 
from all 50 states, Puerto Rico, and 
the District of Columbia. This expansion 
brings NVDRS closer to the goal of 
providing a complete picture of violent 
deaths across the nation
PR
2002: MA, MD, NJ, OR, SC, VA
2003: AK, CO, GA, NC, OK, RI, WI
2004: KY, NM, UT
2009: MI, OH
2014: AZ, CT, HI, IA, IL, IN, KS, ME, MN, NH, NY, PA, VT, WA
2016: AL, CA, DE, DC, LA, MO, NE, NV, Puerto Rico, WV
2018: AR, FL, ID, MS, MT, ND, SD, TN, TX, WY
States added by year:
