===== Page 1 =====
CDC’s National Violent Death Reporting 
System & Vital Statistics Partners
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC’s) National Violent Death Reporting System (NVDRS) links 
details of violent deaths—the who, when, where, and how—and shares insights into why they occurred. 
NVDRS relies on information from source documents, such as death certificates, coroner/medical examiner reports 
(including toxicology results), and law enforcement reports, to pool anonymized data on violent deaths and their 
circumstances into one database. Such data pooled together are far more comprehensive than what is available 
elsewhere, so decision-makers and program planners may use the results to better tailor violence prevention efforts.
What is the role of vital registrars in NVDRS? 
The data that vital registrars provide through death certificates are an essential component of NVDRS. Many state 
violent death reporting systems (VDRS) use death certificates as the first source document to identify cases that meet 
criteria for inclusion in the national system, and state and national systems rely on death certificates to contain accurate 
information. Through International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD-10) codes on the death certificate, 
NVDRS captures most reported violent deaths and deaths of undetermined intent. Death certificates provide 
important demographic information, as well as manner and cause of death data. Other source documents, such as 
coroner/medical examiner reports, toxicology results, and law enforcement reports, add to and validate each case.
Trained abstractors enter anonymized information into a secure database according to standardized CDC 
guidelines. Reports generated from NVDRS help prevention partners identify important populations affected by 
different types of violence and target prevention strategies effectively. 
Which types of death 
are included in 
NVDRS?
NVDRS compiles data for these types of cases: 
• Suicides
•
Homicides
• Legal intervention, excluding legal
executions
• Firearm-related deaths, including
unintentional firearm deaths
• Deaths of undetermined intent, including
undetermined drug overdose deaths
What types of data  
are collected? 
NVDRS collects data for all age groups and includes 
information on: 
• I njury characteristics (e.g., manner of death, cause of death)
• Demographics (e.g., sex, race/ethnicity)
• Circumstances that preceded or were related to a victim’s
death (e.g., intimate partner violence, financial problems)
• Mental health problems, including diagnoses
• Toxicology
• Narratives that provide a summary of the incident based on
law enforcement and coroner/medical examiner reports
• More than 600 unique data elements

===== Page 2 =====
Is the information in 
NVDRS secure? What 
protections are in place? 
Since NVDRS data collection began in 
2003, there have been no reported data 
breaches. VDRS programs enter data 
into an encrypted, web-based system. 
No personally identifiable information 
is entered into the web-based system. 
Data are submitted to CDC using the 
most up-to-date security protocols. 
Why does NVDRS collect 
informa
tion on deaths of 
undetermined intent?
NVDRS collects information on deaths 
of undetermined intent to: 
• Provide a more complete picture of 
deaths that may be intentional 
• Allow public health professionals 
and data analysts to examine 
what unique factors result in an 
undetermined classification 
• Shed light on drug overdose 
deaths (the most common type of 
death of undetermined intent in 
NVDRS) that could not be classified 
as suicide or unintentional 
How can NVDRS data be used? 
NVDRS data have been used since 2003 to:
• Uncover timely topics and emerging issues related 
to violent deaths 
• Reveal important variations in patterns of violent 
deaths across locations and populations and over time 
• Help states and the violence prevention field 
better understand the circumstances that 
contribute to violence in the county, state, territory, 
and country 
• Guide, inform, and help target and evaluate violence 
prevention efforts, including suicide prevention 
Using NVDRS data leads to … 
• Greater understanding of violent deaths 
• More effective use of violence prevention resources 
• Enhanced monitoring of the effectiveness of 
violence prevention strategies
• Healthier, safer communities  
The Reach of NVDRS 
NVDRS began collecting data on violent 
deaths from six states in 2002, followed by 
progressive additions to the system over 
several years. In 2018, NVDRS was expanded 
to include data collection from all 50 states, 
Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia. 
This expansion brings NVDRS closer to the 
goal of providing a complete picture of 
violent deaths across the nation. PR
