===== Page 1 =====
CDC’s National Violent Death Reporting System 
& Coroner/Medical Examiner Partners
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s National Violent Death Reporting System (NVDRS) links 
details of violent deaths – the who, when, where and how – and shares insights into why they occurred. 
NVDRS relies on information from coroner/medical examiner reports (including toxicology), law 
enforcement reports, and death certificates to pool anonymized data on violent deaths and their 
circumstances into one database. Such data are far more comprehensive than what is available 
elsewhere and decision-makers and program planners can use this information to develop and tailor 
violence prevention efforts.
For which types of deaths is 
information collected?
NVDRS compiles data for these types of cases:
• Suicides 
• Homicides 
• Deaths that occur while in custody of law enforcement or     
a cor
rectional facility (excluding legal executions) 
• All firearm related deaths 
• Deaths of undetermined manner, including undetermined 
drug overdose deaths
Why does NVDRS collect information 
on deaths of undetermined intent? 
NVDRS collects information on deaths with an undetermined 
intent because this:
• Provides a more complete picture of violent deaths that may 
be int
entional
• Allows public health professionals or data analysts to 
examine what unique fac
tors result in an undetermined 
classification of manner of death 
• Sheds light on drug overdose deaths that could not be 
classified as suicide or unint
entional (the most common type 
of death of undetermined intent in NVDRS)
What types of data are collected?  
Trained abstractors enter information into the encrypted, 
anonymized system according to standardized CDC            
guidelines. NVDRS collects data for all age groups and            
includes information on: 
• Injury characteristics (e.g., cause of death, type of location) 
• Demographics (e.g., sex, race/ethnicity)
• Circumstances that preceded or were related to a victim’s 
death 
• 
Mental health diagnoses 
• Toxicology 
• Narratives that provide a brief summary of the incident 
based on law enforcement and coroner/ medical examiner 
reports
• More than 600 other unique data elements 
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control 
Division of Violence Prevention
===== Page 2 =====
What can NVDRS data be 
used to do?
• Uncover timely topics and emerging 
issues related to violent deaths
• Reveal important variations in 
patt
erns of violent deaths across locations, 
populations, and over time
• Better understand the circumstances 
that contr
ibute to violence in the county, 
state, or territory
• Guide, inform, and help target and 
evaluate violence prevention efforts, 
including suicide prevention
Leading to…
• Greater understanding of violent and 
under
mined deaths
• More effective use of violence       
pr
evention resources
• Healthier, safer communities
What is the role of Coroners/Medical 
Examiners in NVDRS?
Coroners and medical examiners and the data they provide are an essential component of the NVDRS. Without their 
partnership, NVDRS could not assess circumstances of violent deaths or patterns in injury characteristics and other 
critical information that help local communities identify the most important contributing factors to violent deaths, 
which in turn help prevention partners develop effective prevention strategies. 
When coroners and medical examiners provide detailed information in their reports, NVDRS can be used to develop 
more thorough insights into why these violent deaths occurred and identify ways to prevent future violent deaths.
Is the information in NVDRS secure?                  
What protections are in place?
Since NVDRS data collec
tion began in 2003, there have been no reported data breaches. Participating NVDRS states 
enter data into an encrypted, web-based system. The VDRS states submit this information to CDC using the most up-
to-date security protocols. Local laws that protect other types of health department records, such as communicable 
disease records, also apply to NVDRS files.
For further information on NVDRS, visit https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/nvdrs.

