===== Page 1 =====
NATIONAL VIOLENT DEATH REPORTING SYSTEM 
WEB CODING MANUAL 
VERSION  6.0* 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Division of Violence Prevention 
*Revisi
on Date: January 18 , 2022 
The Nation
al Violent Death Reporting System Web Coding Manual was developed through an extensive consultation 
process. It is published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s National Center for Injury Prevention and 
Control. Use of trade names is for identification purposes only and does not constitute endorsement by the United 
States Department of Health and Human Services. This document and subsequent revisions can be found at the National 
Center for Injury Prevention and Control website: 
https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/datasources/nvdrs/index.html. 
Suggested
 citation:  
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. National Violent Death 
Reporting System Web Coding Manual Version 6. [online]. 2022. [cited 2022 MON DAY]. Available from URL: 
https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/datasources/nvdrs/resources.html 
1 | Page
===== Page 2 =====
 
  2 | Page  
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... 3 
Purpose of the Coding Manual ................................................................................................. 3 
NVDRS Methodology ................................................................................................................. 4 
Coding Training ......................................................................................................................... 6 
Definitions ................................................................................................................................. 7  
SECTION 1. INCIDENT VARIABLES.......................................................................................... 22 
SECTION 2. DOCUMENT TRACKING VARIABLES ..................................................................... 29 
SECTION 3. DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES FOR VICTIMS ............................................................ 32 
Demographics, Race, and Ethnicity .........................................................................................32 
Place of Residence, Birthplace, Industry, Occupation, and Education ...................................41 
SECTION 4. INJURY AND DEATH VARIABLES .......................................................................... 51 
Manner of Death Variables .....................................................................................................51 
Change in Collection of Injury and Death Variables................................................................53 
Injury Locations, Time, and Events .........................................................................................54 
Hospital Codes ........................................................................................................................64 
Wounds and Death Certificate ................................................................................................66 
Cause of Death Variables ........................................................................................................67 
Place of Death .........................................................................................................................68 
SECTION 5. CIRCUMSTANCE VARIABLES ................................................................................ 76 
General Guidance on Coding NVDRS Circumstances ..............................................................76 
Indicating "Circumstances Known” .........................................................................................79 
Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and Other Addictions........................................................80 
Relationships, Abuse, and Life Stressors .................................................................................89 
Crime and Criminal Activity ...................................................................................................108 
Manner-Specific Circumstances for Homicide ......................................................................116 
Manner-Specific Circumstances for Suicide ..........................................................................127 
Manner-Specific Circumstances for Unintentional Firearm Deaths .....................................140 
Other Circumstances: All Manners .......................................................................................148 
SECTION 6. WEAPON VARIABLES ........................................................................................ 1 51 
Weapon Type ........................................................................................................................151 
Other Weapon Information ..................................................................................................152 
Firearm Variables ..................................................................................................................153 
Gun Access Narrative ............................................................................................................157 
SECTION 7. SUSPECT VARIABLES ......................................................................................... 1 60 
SECTION 8. TOXICOLOGY VARIABLES .................................................................................. 171  
SECTION 9. CHILD FATALITY REVIEW OPTIONAL MODULE ................................................... 1 80 
SECTION 10. INTIMATE PARTNER VIOLENCE OPTIONAL MODULE ........................................ 202 
SECTION 11. SCHOOL-ASSOCIATED VIOLENT DEATHS MODULE............................................ 225 
SECTION 12. PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICER SUICIDE MODULE ...................................................... 2 51 
SECTION 13. APPENDICES ................................................................................................... 262  
  
===== Page 3 =====
INTRODUCTION  
Introduction  3 | Page  
  
1.0  Purpose of the Coding Manual  
The NVDRS Coding Manual is a reference document to be used for defining cases and variables, entering 
data, and checking data once they are entered. It contains information about all data elements (i.e., 
variables) and the way the data are structured. It should be kept on hand when doing data entry, 
abstraction, or checking/reabstraction, both in the office and in the field. The manual is also a useful 
guide to understanding the way in which NVDRS variables are defined when conducting data analysis. 
1.1 Companion Documents 
Starting in 2018, historical information on variables in the NVDRS system has been added to a data 
dictionary, and a description of how key data elements can be used in analyses has been added to the 
NVDRS Analytic Manual. 
1.2 Background on NVDRS 
Since 1989, public health leaders and others aware of the long-standing gap in information about 
violence emphasized the need for a national surveillance system for violent deaths. In 1999, the 
Institute of Medicine, currently known as the National Academy of Medicine, recommended that the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) develop a fatal intentional injury surveillance system 
modeled after the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration’s Fatality Analysis Reporting System. 
That same year, six private foundations pooled their funds to demonstrate the importance and 
feasibility of data collection about violent deaths given adequate funding. They supported the National 
Violent Injury Statistics System (NVISS). NVISS was administered by the Harvard Injury Control Research 
Center and included 12 participating universities, health departments, and medical centers. 
In 2000, dozens of medical associations, suicide prevention groups, child protection advocates, and 
family violence prevention organizations joined a coalition whose purpose was to secure federal funding 
to extend NVISS-like surveillance nationwide. Congress approved $1.5 million to start the new system, 
called the National Violent Death Reporting System (NVDRS), in fiscal year 2002. The first cooperative 
agreements were established with six state health departments in September 2002, including: 
Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, Oregon, South Carolina, and Virginia.  
Deaths that occurred in 2003 constituted the first year data were collected for NVDRS. Funding for 
additional states was made available in fiscal year 2003 and another seven states implemented NVDRS 
(Alaska, Colorado, Georgia, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode Island, and Wisconsin). Further funding 
became available in 2004, and Kentucky, New Mexico, Utah, and four counties in California began data 
collection in 2005. California ended data collection for these counties in 2009. The system expanded 
that same year, with two more states (Michigan and Ohio) joining NVDRS and collecting data beginning 
in 2010. In 2014, 14 more states joined NVDRS (Arizona, Connecticut, Hawaii, Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, 
Kansas, Maine, Minnesota, New Hampshire, New York, Pennsylvania, Vermont, and Washington) and 
began collecting data in 2015. NVDRS expanded again in 2016 with an additional eight states (Alabama, 
California, Delaware, Louisiana, Missouri, Nebraska, Nevada, and West Virginia), the District of 
Columbia, and Puerto Rico joining the system and beginning data collection in 2017. Finally, in 2018, 10 
states (Arkansas, Florida, Idaho, Mississippi, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, 
and Wyoming) joined the system and began collecting data in 2019. NVDRS became a national system 
===== Page 4 =====
Introduction  4 | Page  
  
with all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico collecting data in 2019. Data availability 
varies by year and by state. Please refer to the NVDRS Analytic Manual for more details. Email nvdrs-
rad@cdc.gov  to request an NVDRS Analytic Manual. 
1.3  Vision 
To assis
t in the prevention of violent deaths in the United States by facilitating systematically and 
routinely collected, accurate, timely, and comprehensive data for prevention program development. 
1.4  Goals 
1. Collect and analyze timely, high-quality data for monitoring the magnitude and 
characteristics of violent deaths at the national, state, and local levels. 
2. Ensure that violent death data are routinely and expeditiously disseminated to both public 
health and law enforcement officials, policy makers, and the public in accordance with data 
re-release plans. 
3. Track and facilitate the use of NVDRS data to research, develop, implement, and evaluate 
strategies, programs and policies designed to prevent violent deaths and injuries at the 
national, state, and local levels. 
4. Build and strengthen partnerships with organizations and communities at the national, 
state, and local levels to ensure that data collected are used to prevent violent deaths and 
injuries. 
5. Identify creative strategies for sustaining NVDRS in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, 
and U.S. territories. 
2.0 NVDRS Methodology 
NVDRS is a population-based active surveillance system that collects information on violent deaths that 
occur among both residents and nonresidents of U.S. states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico.  
The system uses the World Health Organization (WHO) definition of a violent death: “a death resulting 
from the intentional use of physical force or power against oneself, another person, or against a group 
or community.1” The case definition includes suicides, homicides, deaths from legal intervention (a 
subtype of homicide where the victim is killed by or died as a result of law enforcement acting in the line 
of duty), deaths of undetermined intent, and unintentional firearm fatalities. Deaths of undetermined 
intent are included because this category includes deaths with some evidence of intent, but without 
enough to definitively classify the death as purposeful. Unintentional firearm injury deaths are included 
because the category is likely to include some deaths that are intentional or of undetermined intent. 
1World Health Organization, World Report on Violence and Health: 
http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/violence/world_report/en 
The fo
llowing deaths are excluded from NVDRS: 1) legal executions, which are considered to be a form 
of death from legal intervention, as they are beyond the scope of public health, 2) legal assisted suicides, 
and 3) deaths due to acts of war (acts due to terrorism are included, however). 
===== Page 5 =====
Introduction  5 | Page  
  
The
 system is coordinated and funded at the federal level and relies on separate data collection in each 
state, district, or territory managed by the state health department or their bona fide agent (e.g., Office 
of the Chief Medical Examiner). Unlike most public health surveillance systems that are based on the 
individual victim, the NVDRS is incident-based and links all victims and alleged perpetrators (suspects) 
associated with a given incident in one record. Decisions about whether two or more deaths belong to 
the same incident are governed by the timing of the injuries, rather than the timing of the deaths. 
Specifically, deaths resulting from injuries that occur within 24 hours of each other (i.e., the 24-hour 
rule) and are clearly linked by source documents, as discussed below in the guidelines on entering a 
case, would be considered part of the same incident.  
Examples of an NVDRS incident include but are not limited to:  
 One isolated homicide, suicide, legal intervention death, death of undetermined intent meeting 
NVDRS case definitions, or unintentional firearm death; 
 Two or more homicides, including legal interventions, when the deaths involve at least one person 
who is a suspect or victim in the first death and a suspect or victim in the second death and the fatal 
injuries are inflicted less than 24 hours apart;  
 Two or more suicides or undetermined manner deaths, when there is some evidence that the 
second or subsequent death was planned to coincide with or follow the preceding death, and the 
fatal injuries are inflicted less than 24 hours apart; or 
 A single homicide or multiple homicides followed by suicide of the suspected perpetrator within the 
same 24 hours. 
Each incident record contains information about victims, suspects, the relationship of the victim to the   
suspect, injury characteristics, circumstances surrounding the incident, toxicology findings for the victim, 
characteristics of weapon(s) involved in the incident, and narrative accounts of the events in the 
incident. To fully characterize NVDRS incidents, VDRS programs collect information from numerous data 
sources. 
Required primary source documents:  
 Death certificates (DC) 
 Coroner/Medical examiner (C/ME) reports, including toxicology reports 
 Law enforcement (LE) reports   
Secondary or optional sources: 
 Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR) and National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS) 
reports 
 Child Fatality Review (CFR) team data 
 Intimate partner violence (IPV) expanded data (e.g., from domestic violence or IPV homicide review 
panels) 
 Crime lab data 
 Hospital data 
 Other LE data from official sources, such as court records or official LE press releases  
Information from SHR and NIBRS reports, CFR, IPV review panels, and other LE data from official sources 
can be used to inform data elements that typically (e.g., weapon information) or exclusively (i.e., LE 
circumstances) come from LE in NVDRS. Each of these sources is either based on LE information (e.g., 
===== Page 6 =====
SHR, NIBRS, press releases) or is part of an investigative team that interacts with the criminal justice 
system (e.g., CFR teams, IPV homicide review, the court system). 
Information from additional data sources (such as press accounts) may be included in the incident 
narrative but must not be identified as coming from an official NVDRS source (i.e., sources used to code 
circumstances), and the source from which it originated should be be made clear in the narrative (e.g., a 
newspaper may report a circumstance not identified in a C/ME or LE report, and it should be noted in 
the narrative as coming from media accounts). 
Data is either abstracted from the records maintained by the primary source data providers at their 
offices or by transfer of data from the primary source data providers to the VDRS program office. Data 
may be manually entered into the software or electronically imported. Data collection is staged so that 
basic demographic information is available for early analyses and more detailed information about 
circumstances and potential contributing factors are collected later and can be analyzed later. DCs often 
provide the earliest information in most states, but other states may identify incidents (i.e., initiate 
cases) through the C/ME or LE reports. Regardless of the source(s), information on the number of 
violent deaths is typically available to the VDRS program office and entered into the system within four 
months of the occurrence of death. LE and C/ME data are expected to be entered in NVDRS within 16 
months of the end of the calendar year in which the death occurred. 
NVDRS makes a unique contribution by capturing information on circumstance surrounding suicides, 
undetermined deaths that may be due to violence, homicides, legal intervention deaths, and 
unintentional firearm injuries. These circumstances for homicide, legal intervention death, suicide, and 
deaths of undetermined intent include factors such as mental health history and status, whether a 
victim disclosed intent to die by suicide, interpersonal conflicts, and criminal activity. Circumstance 
variables for unintentional firearm deaths record the context and specific use of the firearms. For 
homicides, details are collected on relationships between victims and suspects, as well as whether there 
was a history of abuse or whether the suspect was a caregiver of the victim. NVDRS makes another 
unique contribution by collecting data on mechanisms leading to injury and detailed information on 
firearms and poisons, such as the type of firearm or substance involved. 
The data are entered into a national web-based system and are stored without personally identifiable 
information (PII) in a secure national database maintained by CDC. 
Over time, additional data sources that are particularly useful for specific kinds of death may be added 
to the system. In the first year of NVDRS, for example, some of the funded state health departments 
tested the availability and utility of data from CFR teams, using a module specially designed to take 
advantage of the detailed information available from that source. An IPV module was also subsequently 
added to the system and is available to states interested in collecting detailed information on IPV-
related deaths, such as data that comes from IPV homicide review panels.  
NVDRS has also added modules for collecting more information about deaths due to drug overdose, 
school-associated violent deaths (SAVDs), and public safety officer suicides.  These modules draw 
information from multiple sources and provide greater detail about these types of incidents.  
3.0 Coding training 
Coding training is required for new VDRS programs joining NVDRS and for new data abstractors in all 
VDRS states. Ongoing coding support is provided through an email helpdesk dedicated to coding 
Introduction 6 | Page  
===== Page 7 =====
 
Introduction  7 | Page  
  
questions, monthly conference calls with all VDRS programs, conference calls with individual VDRS 
programs as needed or requested, and optional coding workgroup calls. This coding manual provides 
detailed information about every NVDRS data element and should serve as the standard reference for 
anyone working with NVDRS. 
 
4.0 Definitions 
CDC has developed case definitions specifically for NVDRS. VDRS programs should collect information 
about all cases that meet these definitions and may also develop ones for their own program. If their 
definitions are broader than those shown here, VDRS programs may enter these cases which should be 
identified as “Other (State-Defined)” in the Incident Type field. CDC-generated reports will only include 
cases that meet CDC case definitions. VDRS programs should cite which definition they are using—VDRS 
program-specific or the federal NVDRS definition—when they cite their own data. 
 
I. Violent Death 
A. Conceptua
l de
finition 
A violent death is a death that results from the intentional use of physical force or power, 
threatened or actual, against oneself, another person, or a group or community. The person using 
the force or power needs only to have intended to use force or power; they need not to have 
intended to produce the consequence that actually occurred. “Physical force” should be interpreted 
broadly to include the use of poisons or drugs. The word “power” includes acts of neglect or 
omission by one person who has control over another. 
 
In addition, NVDRS captures unintentional firearm deaths. Such deaths are defined in Section IV.D, 
below. 
 
B. Operational definition to be used in case ascertainment 
DCs that are coded with an underlying cause of death as one of the ICD-10 codes listed in Table 1 
should be included. A death that is not given an appropriate ICD-10 code may be included if the DC, 
LE, or C/ME report characterizes the death as a suicide, homicide, legal intervention death, or death 
of undetermined intent, and the death meets the conceptual definition given above. 
 
A death of a fetus prior to birth that is caused by violence is not included in the case definition and 
should never be included in NVDRS. However, states that want to collect such deaths may enter 
these as a separate incident (in instances where multiple victims exist) and follow the guidance as 
described in the Definitions section above. 
 
II. Resident and Occurrent Violent Deaths 
A. U.S. resident violent death 
The decedent was a resident of the United States, including its territories, according to the DC. 
Please note this also includes residents of American Indian reservations at the time of injury.  
 
B. State resident violent death 
The decedent was an official resident of the state, district, or territory, including those portions 
of an American Indian reservation within the state at the time of injury, according to the DC. 
 
C. U.S. occurrent violent death 
The initial injury must have occurred within the United States including its territories. Please 
===== Page 8 =====
 
Introduction  8 | Page  
  
note this also includes injuries that occurred on American Indian reservations. 
 
D. State occurrent violent death 
The initial injury must have occurred within the state, district, or territory, or on those portions 
of the American Indian reservations within the state. 
 
Note: Collecting all re sident violent deaths is essential for calculating population-based rates. Occurrent 
fatal injury data is essential for designing and evaluating prevention efforts focused on specific 
communities. State of residence and state of occurrence of a fatal injury will usually be the same, but 
every state will have some exceptions. States are expected to collect violent deaths among their 
residents wherever they occur including fatal violent injuries occurring within their borders irrespective 
of residence. However, the state of injury occurrence is responsible for collecting the information if the 
states of residence and injury occurrence are different. For example, if a resident of state A dies as a 
result of a fatal injury that occurred in state B, state B is responsible for collecting the information. 
When states receive source documents for an incident that occurred in another state, they may 
coordinate with the other state responsible for collecting data on that incident by using the Transfer 
Incident feature in the NVDRS web-based system to share information and to transfer ownership to the 
appropriate state. The Transfer Incident feature was added in August 2021 to allow states to transfer 
incidents directly within the web-based system. Please email NVDRS-Software@cdc.gov for guidance on 
how to use the Transfer Incident feature. 
 
If a VDRS p
rogram chooses to collect and enter information into the NVDRS web-based system about a 
resident death where the fatal injury occurred in a different NVDRS state, the data abstractor should 
mark the incident type for these cases as “Other (State-Defined)” to avoid duplication. Please see the 
decision tree in Appendix A for further guidance related to resident and occurrent deaths. 
 
III. Preliminary Versus Confirmed Violent Death 
A. Preliminary violent death 
The underlying cause of death has not yet been officially coded using the International Statistical 
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, 10th Revision (ICD-10). Review of the 
uncoded DC or official LE or C/ME report will likely indicate that the death should ultimately be 
coded as one of the ICD codes included in the case definition above. 
 
B. Confirmed violent death 
The underlying cause of death has been officially coded using ICD-10. The ICD-10 code assigned 
to the death matches the case definition above. Alternatively, abstractors identified/confirmed 
the death using other data sources (e.g., LE and C/ME). 
 
IV. Manners of Death 
For public health purposes, the C/ME designates type of NVDRS deaths according to the ICD code 
assigned to the underlying cause of death indicated on the DC (per Table 1). However, coroners or 
medical examiners may not uniformly apply the same criteria. Therefore, NVDRS will also try to achieve 
some standardization of death type through these definitions. Further, some of the manners of death 
listed below are not included as options on a standard DC. For instance, a person dying after being shot 
by a law enforcement officer in the line of duty may be called a “homicide” on the DC but will be called a 
“legal intervention” death in NVDRS. Similarly, a self-inflicted firearm death ruled “accidental” on a DC 
will be included as an “unintentional firearm” death in NVDRS. Therefore, ICD codes may not always 
match NVDRS definitions of manner of death. NVDRS sites should use the definitions below to identify 
===== Page 9 =====
 
Introduction  9 | Page  
  
preliminary cases. 
 
A. Suicide 
A suicide is a death resulting from the intentional use of force against oneself. A preponderance 
of evidence should indicate that the use of force was intentional. 
 
Note that the following sce narios should be classified as suicide: 
 A person engaged in a suicidal act, then changed their mind, but still died as a result of the 
act 
 A person died while using a firearm for “Russian roulette,” where a person aims a partially 
loaded gun at themself and pulls the trigger knowing there is at least some chance the gun 
would fire 
 A person intended only to injure themself rather than die by suicide (e.g., a man shot 
himself in the leg with intent to injure but severed the femoral artery and died)  
 Assisted suicide involving passive assistance to the decedent (e.g., supplying only means or 
information needed to complete the act)  
 Intentional, self-inflicted deaths committed while under the influence of a mind-altering 
drug taken voluntarily 
 Intentional self-inflicted deaths committed while mentally ill (e.g., acute psychotic episodes 
that may impair a person’s judgment) 
 
The following spec ific scenarios should not be classified as suicide (the preferred category is 
shown in parentheses): 
 The physical consequences of chronic substance abuse, including alcohol or drugs (natural 
de
ath)  
 Acute substance abuse including alcohol or drugs with less than a preponderance of 
evidence to use the substance(s) with intent to harm oneself (undetermined or 
unintentional injury death) 
 Death as a result of autoerotic behavior, e.g., self-strangulation during sexual activity 
(unintentional injury death) 
 
B. Homicide 
Homicide is defined as a death resulting from the intentional use of force or power, threatened 
or actual, against another person, group, or community. A preponderance of evidence must 
indicate that the use of force was intentional. Such deaths resulting from legal intervention are 
included in a separate category below. Two special scenarios the National Center for Health 
Statistics (NCHS) regards as homicides are included in the NVDRS definition: (1) arson with no 
intent to injure a person, and (2) a stabbing with intent unspecified. 
 
Note that the following sce narios should be classified as homicide: 
 Deaths when the suspect intended to only injure rather than kill the victim 
 Deaths resulting from heart attacks induced when someone uses force or power against the 
decedent  
 A death resulting from a weapon that discharges unintentionally while being used to control 
or frighten the victim 
 Deaths that result when a person kills an attacker in self-defense 
 Deaths labeled “justifiable homicides” where the person committing the homicide was not a 
law enforcement officer 
===== Page 10 =====
 
Introduction  10 | Page  
  
 Death that results from a variation of “Russian Roulette” where one person aims a partially 
loaded gun at another person and pulls the trigger knowing that there was at least some 
chance that the gun would fire 
 Death attributed to “child abuse” without an intent being specified 
 Death of a child after birth that results from a direct injury due to violence sustained prior to 
birth 
 Death that results from an intentional act of neglect or omission by one person against 
another 
 
The following scenarios should no t be classified as homicide (the preferred category is shown in 
parentheses):  
 “Vehicular homicide” without a preponderance of evidence of intent to use force against 
ano
ther (unintentional injury) 
 Hunting accident with a gun (unintentional firearm injury) 
 Accidental deaths at shooting ranges (unintentional firearm injury) 
 A youth kills someone by playing with a gun they believed to be unloaded (unintentional 
firearm injury) 
 Deaths that take place in combat in declared or undeclared wars (operation of war – not 
collected by NVDRS) 
 Death of a child after birth that results indirectly from violence sustained by its mother 
before its birth, e.g., a death from prematurity following premature labor brought on by 
violence (coded as “condition originating in the perinatal period – not collected by NVDRS”) 
 Accidental (unintentional) poisoning deaths due to illegal or prescription drug overdose, 
even when the person who provided those drugs was charged with homicide (unintentional 
deaths not involving firearms are outside the scope of NVDRS. A death of this type might be 
within the scope of “undetermined manner of death” below if it cannot be determined 
whether the death was intentional or unintentional. 
 Infant deaths due to maternal substance misuse (e.g., exposure to substance through breast 
milk), with no indication of intent to harm the infant, even when the mother is being 
charged with homicide. 
 
C. Undetermined manner of death 
Undetermined death is a death resulting from the use of force or power against oneself or 
another person for which the evidence indicating one manner of death is no more compelling 
than the evidence indicating another manner of death, according to the judgment of death 
investigators. Homicide and suicide deaths can be detected using the ICD-10 codes and by 
reviewing the manner of death on the preliminary DC, LE report, or C/ME report. In contrast, 
identifying undetermined deaths involves looking at the ICD-10 codes and reviewing both 
underlying cause of death and the manner of death on the preliminary DC, LE report, or C/ME 
report. The process is described below. 
 
Step 1: Before looking at the manner of death, confirm that the cause of death is known and 
that it results from the use of force or power against oneself or another person (e.g., gunshot 
wound, drug overdose, hanging/suffocation, or fall) or that mechanism of death is an 
unspecified trauma. The NVDRS weapon type must be known for the death to be included with 
an Abstractor Assigned Manner of Death = “Undetermined.” A manner of death of “Could not 
be determined” on the DC, LE report, or C/ME report by itself is not sufficient to classify a death 
as Undetermined for NVDRS. 
===== Page 11 =====
 
Introduction  11 | Page  
  
 
 Tips on reading the DC: abstractors should review the text or narrative information on the 
DC to identify the possible cause of death (NVDRS weapon type), particularly the text 
associated with the Cause of Death (Part I and Part II) and the description for “How the 
Injury Occurred.”  
 Tips on LE and C/ME reports: confirm the NVDRS weapon is known. 
 Examples of cases that are potentially Undetermined per NVDRS case definitions where the 
abstractor should review the manner of death (see Step 2): 
1) Victim died of a drug overdose 
2) Victim died from a fall off of a cliff  
3) A child asphyxiated 
4) A victim died from blunt trauma to the head from a fall 
5) A victim died from abdominal trauma 
 Examples of cases that should not be classified as Undetermined: 
1) A body is found in the woods and the cause of death is unknown 
2) A 3-month old child is found dead in his/her crib by his/her parents. The cause of 
death is unspecified. 
3) Deaths due to “Sudden Unexplained Infant Death” (SUID) or “Sudden Infant Death 
Syndrome” (SIDS) 
 
Step 2: Deaths meeting the criteria for Step 1 (i.e., the cause of death is known and it results 
from the use of force or power against oneself or another person and the weapon type is 
known) can be classified as “Undetermined” in NVDRS if the reason the manner could not be 
determined is the evidence indicating one manner of death is no more compelling than the 
evidence indicating another manner of death. 
 
 Tips on reading the DC: identify deaths with manner of death equal to “Could not be 
determined” from the “Manner of death” checkbox. Inspect other information to confirm 
that multiple manners of death are plausible or are being considered. 
 Tips on LE and C/ME reports: confirm the manner of death is “Could not be determined.” 
 Examples of cases that should be classified as Undetermined for NVDRS: 
1) Victim died of a drug overdose and it could not be determined if it was 
unintentional (i.e., accidental) or a suicide 
2) Victim died from a fall off a cliff and it could not be determined if it was 
unintentional or a suicide 
3) The victim was found in their home and had died of a head trauma sustained in a 
fall. Foul play was not ruled out.  
 Examples of cases that s hould not be classified as Undetermined: 
1) An adult falls off a cliff while hiking with a group of friends and the manner of death 
is listed on all three data sources as “Accidental/Unintentional.” 
 
Step 3: When the ICD-10 codes for the underlying and contributory causes of death become 
available, compare deaths classified as undetermined intent by the ICD-10 codes (i.e., those 
with Y10-Y34, Y87.2 or Y89.9) and the deaths identified using the steps above to identify new 
cases and possible misclassifications. 
 
D. Unintentional firearm injury death 
Unintentional firearm death is defined as a death resulting from a penetrating injury or gunshot 
===== Page 12 =====
 
Introduction  12 | Page  
  
wound from a weapon that uses a powder charge to fire a projectile when there was a 
preponderance of evidence that the shooting was not intentionally directed at the victim. Other 
types of unintentional deaths (e.g., accidental overdose) are not covered here. 
 
Note that the following sc enarios should be classified as unintentional firearm deaths:  
 Celebratory firing that was not intended to frighten, control, or harm anyone 
 A person shoots himself/herself when using a gun to frighten, control, or harm another 
person 
 A child younger than the age of 6 shoots himself/herself or another person  
 A soldier who is shot during field exercises in peacetime 
 A person mistakenly thinks a gun is unloaded and shoots himself/herself or another person 
while fooling around with it 
 A child who dies after birth from an unintentional firearm injury that is sustained prior to 
birth (i.e., in utero) 
 
The following scenarios sho uld not be classified as unintentional firearm deaths (the preferred 
NVDRS category is shown in parentheses): 
 A person unintentionally shoots someone while defending himself/herself ag ainst an 
aggressor (homicide)   
 A person unintentionally shoots another person while using a gun to commit a crime 
(homicide)  
 Firearm injuries caused by unintentionally striking a person with the firearm, e.g., by 
dropping it on someone’s head rather than with a projectile fired from the firearm 
(homicide or unintentional)  
 Unintentional injuries from non-powder guns such as BB, pellet, and other compressed air 
or gas-powered guns (outside of system scope) 
 
E. Legal intervention death 
Legal intervention death is defined as a death in which the decedent was killed by or died as a 
result of a law enforcement officer or other peace officer (persons with specified legal authority 
to use deadly force), including military law enforcement, acting in the line of duty. The term 
legal intervention is a classification from ICD-10 codes and does not denote the lawfulness or 
legality of the circumstances surrounding the death. 
 
These deaths can occur while a law enforcement officer conducts a random or targeted traffic 
stop, issues a citation, arrests or is in pursuit to apprehend a victim (e.g., victim fleeing or 
escaping arrest), responds to a call to maintain order, minimizes disturbances and/or ensures 
safety (e.g., domestic disturbances, to circumvent suicide crisis), or other actions as part of law 
enforcement duties. 
 
Please note that the following scenarios fall within the definition of legal intervention deaths in 
NVDRS: 
1. Incidents in which the decedent was killed while fleeing from/being pursued by law 
enforcement, including some scenarios in which the victim was not directly injured by law 
enforcement officers. Examples include: 
o Victim’s death resulting from a car crash while being pursued by law enforcement in a 
high-speed chase 
o Victim’s death resulting from attempting to escape law enforcement contact or arrest 
===== Page 13 =====
 
Introduction  13 | Page  
  
(e.g., victim runs away from officers, unintentionally falls off a bridge, and dies)   
o Death resulting from a victim being killed by another person unrelated to the event 
while being pursued by law enforcement (e.g., a motorist hits and kills a victim who was 
being pursued by law enforcement) 
2. Incidents in which the decedent died as the result of force applied by law enforcement 
officers without clear lethal intent (e.g., restraint, use of typically nonlethal weapon such as 
a taser)  
3. “Justifiable” and “criminal” homicides meeting the above definition 
4. Bystanders who are inadvertently killed by law enforcement acting in the line of duty by 
mechanisms such as firearms, explosives, blunt objects (e.g., batons), sharp objects, or 
personal weapons  
 
Please note that the follo wing scenarios should not be classified as legal intervention deaths in 
NVDRS:  
1. Legal executions and cases of justifiable homicide not involving a law enforcement or other 
peac
e officer 
2. Persons who were in contact with and wounded by law enforcement, but who subsequently 
died from some other means (e.g., a person was shot by law enforcement but subsequently 
died of a drug overdose)  
3. In motor vehicle crash deaths, persons who are not directly involved in law enforcement 
pursuit of a suspect but are inadvertently killed by law enforcement (e.g., law enforcement 
hit and kill a pedestrian while in pursuit of a suspected drunk driver; law enforcement 
unintentionally hit an unrelated car at a stoplight while pursuing a suspect)  
4. A passenger is riding in the car of the person who is bei ng pursued by law enforcement but 
is clearly not involved in the perpetration of the crime (or other reason) which led to the 
pursuit (e.g., a baby is inadvertently killed when a carjacker being pursued by law 
enforcement crashes the car)    
 
F. Terrorism-rel ated death 
Terrorism deaths are homicides or suicides that result from events that are labeled by the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) as acts of terrorism. Terrorism is a mechanism of death 
rather than a manner of death. The manner of such death is either homicide or suicide. 
 
G. Unintentional/accidental poisoning death 
These deaths are only applicable to data collected within the State Unintentional Drug Overdose 
Reporting System (SUDORS) program which also uses the NVDRS platform for data collection. 
See https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/od2a/index.html for more information. See  Appendix B 
for a comparison of NVDRS and SUDORS.  
 
Unintentional poisoning deaths are those that result from unexpected or unplanned ingestion, 
inhalation, injection, or other exposure to an amount of any substance that interferes with 
normal body functions. 
 
V. Violent Death Incident 
Unlike most public health surveillance systems based on individuals, the NVDRS is incident-based and 
reports all victims and suspects associated with a given incident in one record. An incident is defined as 
one or more related deaths meeting NVDRS case definitions that occur within the same 24-hour 
period. 
===== Page 14 =====
 
Introduction  14 | Page  
  
 
A violent death incident can be made up of any of the following: 
 One isolated violent death 
 Two or more homicides, including legal intervention deaths, when: 
1. the deaths involve at least one person who is a suspect or victim in the first death and a 
suspect or victim in the second death, and  
2. the fatal injuries are inflicted less than 24 hours apart 
 Two or more suicides or undetermined manner of deaths when:  
1. there is some evidence that the second or subsequent death was planned to coincide 
with or follow the preceding death, and 
2. the fatal injuries are inflicted less than 24 hours apart 
 One or more homicides or unintentional firearm deaths combined with one or more suicides 
when: 
1. the suspect in the first death is the person who dies by suicide, and 
2. the fatal injuries are inflicted less than 24 hours apart  
 Two or more unintentional firearm deaths when: 
1. the same firearm is used to inflict two or more fatal injuries, and 
2. the fatal injuries are inflicted by one shot or a burst of shots 
 
Examples of single incidents that involve more than one death: 
 Homicide: A member of Gang A kills a member of Gang B and Gang B retaliates, killing a 
member of Gang A, all during a street brawl. (The members of Gang A are suspects in the first 
killing, and one of them becomes the victim in the second.) 
 Homicide: A man kills his family and then drives to work to kill his supervisor (The suspect in the 
first group of homicides is also the suspect in the second homicide.) 
 Homicide and legal intervention: law enforcement kills a suspect as he flees the scene of a 
homicide (The first suspect is the victim in the second death.) 
 Suicide: An elderly couple dies by suicide together (The deaths were planned to coincide.) 
 Homicide-suicide: A man kills his wife at home and then dies by suicide 12 hours later when 
confronted by law enforcement. 
 Unintentional firearm-suicide: A boy unintentionally kills his father while hunting and dies by 
suicide within 24 hours due to feelings of guilt 
 
Examples of separate incidents: 
 Homicides: A sniper kills a person and 2 days later returns to the same location and kills another 
person (more than 24 hours apart). 
 Suicides: Two teenagers agree to die by suicide on the same day. One dies by suicide on the 
agreed upon day, while the other does not attempt suicide that day but does so a week later 
and dies (more than 24 hours apart.) 
 Homicide-suicide: A woman learns that her son has murdered her husband. She dies by suicide 
because of grief. (The suspect in the first death is not the person who dies by suicide.) 
 
Note: Decisions about whether two or more deaths belong to the same incident should be based on the 
timing of the injuries, rather than the timing of the deaths and the establishment of a clear link between 
victims. 
 
VI. Resident and Occurrent Violent Death Incidents  
A. Resident incident 
===== Page 15 =====
 
Introduction  15 | Page  
  
The majority of the deaths in the incident must be resident (as described in Section II: A–D 
above) violent deaths. If no jurisdiction accounts for the majority of victims, the incident would 
be a resident incident for the jurisdiction of residence of the first victim. 
 
B. Occurrent incident 
The majority of fatal injuries in the incident must be occurrent fatal injuries. If no jurisdiction 
accounts for the majority of fatal injuries, the incident would be an occurrent incident for the 
place of injury of the first victim. 
 
Note: The responsibility for abstracting an incident falls on the state where the first injury occurred 
irrespective of where the victim was a resident or died. NVDRS states should cooperate whenever 
possible by sending records to the state with responsibility for abstraction when incidents cross state 
lines.  
 
VII. Data Year 
A. Year of a violent death 
The year of death is the calendar year in which the victim died. So, for example, if a victim was 
injured at the end of December 2002, but died in early January 2003, the death would be 
reported in the 2003 data year. Although the NVDRS software allows for specific month or date 
of death to be entered as “Unknown,” the year of death must be filled in. In the case of a true 
unknown year of death (as in skeletal remains with unknown year of death, or an unattended 
death that may have occurred either shortly before or shortly after January 1st), enter the year 
in which the body was found as the year of death. 
 
B. Year of a violent death for multiple death incidents 
The year of a violent death incident is the first year in which any of the victims in the incident 
died. For example, if two people are shot on December 21, 2006 and one dies on December 22, 
2006 and the second dies on January 4, 2007, the year of the incident would be 2006. The only 
exception to this rule occurs when any of the deaths occurred in a year prior to 2003, the first 
year of NVDRS. In that case, place the incident in the first year of death after 2002. Hence, 
incidents with deaths in 2002 and 2003 should be placed in 2003. Incidents with deaths in 2002 
and 2004 should be placed in 2004. Incidents with deaths in 2003 and 2004 should be placed in 
2003. 
 
VIII. Annual Violent Death Rate 
The violent death rate per year is the number of resident violent deaths recorded during the calendar 
year divided by the resident population of the jurisdiction, as defined in official U.S. Census figures, 
and multiplied by 100,000 for a rate per 100,000 persons. Preliminary rates include both preliminary 
and confirmed deaths. Confirmed rates include only confirmed deaths. Intercensal state population 
estimates may be used for intercensal year rates when official U.S. Census figures are not available. 
The state should specify whether U.S. Census or state estimates are used as the source of the 
population estimate.   
 
 
 
 
  
===== Page 16 =====
 
Introduction  16 | Page  
  
 
5.0 Table 1. ICD-10 External Causes of Death Codes for Manners of Death Meeting the 
NVDRS Case Definition ICD-10 Codes 
 
 
Manner of death Death ≤1 year 
after injury 
Death >1 year 
after injury 
Deaths any time after 
injury 
Intentional self-harm 
(suicide) 
X60–X84 Y87.0 
U03 (attributable to 
terrorism) 
Assault (homicide) X85–X99, Y00–Y09 Y87.1 
U01, U02 (attributable to 
terrorism) 
Event of undetermined 
intent 
Y10–Y34 Y87.2, Y89.9 N/A 
Unintentional exposure 
to inanimate mechanical 
forces (firearms) 
W32–W34 Y86 N/A 
Legal intervention 
(excluding executions, 
Y35.5) 
Y35.0–Y35.4, 
Y35.6, Y35.7 
Y89.0 N/A 
 
 
6.0 Notes on Terminology 
Use of the term “homicide” can be a point of confusion in a violent death reporting system. The origins 
of the term “homicide” literally mean the killing of one person by another, whether intentionally or 
unintentionally. Law enforcement and many coroners/medical examiner may adhere to this broader 
definition of homicide and therefore sometimes refer to certain unintentional car crash deaths as 
“vehicular homicides,” and the unintentional death of a person which results from another’s negligence 
as “negligent homicides.” Examples of the latter category are unintentional shootings of one person by 
another (as in two 12-year-old boys playing with a gun they believed was unloaded) and negligent acts 
by a caregiver of a dependent person (as in a toddler who was left unattended in the bathtub briefly 
while her caregiver answered the phone). 
 
The ICD system, conversely, uses the term homicide in its narrower sense to indicate the intentional or 
assault-related killing of one person by another. NVDRS also uses this narrower definition of homicide. 
 
The disjuncture between law enforcement and public health uses of the term homicide can lead to 
coding problems. The ICD system is the basis for coding underlying cause of death on the DC. However, 
the code is chosen based on the information supplied by the C/ME on the DC. For example, in the case 
of the 12-year-old boys playing with the gun they mistakenly believed was unloaded, the C/ME is likely 
to code the manner of death as “homicide” and supply only medical information in the text fields for 
underlying cause of death. The information regarding the unintentional nature of the shooting will be 
===== Page 17 =====
 
Introduction  17 | Page  
  
available only in the narrative report, not on the DC itself. The vital statistics coder will likely code the 
case in the homicide range, not the unintentional range, because the information that would place it in 
the unintentional range according to ICD protocols is not available on the DC. This confusion in terms is 
one reason that the NVDRS includes an abstractor-assigned manner of death code. This code applies a 
uniform protocol to categorizing violence-related homicides, unintentional deaths, suicides, and deaths 
due to undetermined intent. 
 
One useful piece of information when attempting to distinguish a violence-related homicide from a 
negligent homicide is to check how the case was reported on the SHR form (if the state collects SHR 
data). Violence-related homicides are reported as “1A – Murder/non-negligent manslaughter” offenses, 
while unintentional homicides (e.g., “accidental” shooting while hunting, children playing with a gun) 
are coded as “1B – Negligent manslaughter” offenses. These distinctions can be made reliably when 
C/ME and LE reports are reviewed for a case. (See Barber C, Hochstadt J, Hemenway D, Azrael D. 
Underestimates of unintentional firearm fatalities: comparing supplementary homicide report data with 
the National Vital Statistics System. Injury Prevention 2002; 8:252–6.) 
 
7.0 Entering a Case/Data Structure 
An incident involving one or more violent deaths is the unit of surveillance in NVDRS. To understand 
how all the variables fit together in one incident, it may be helpful to think of them in a hierarchy with 
two levels: 
 The first, or incident level, is information about the incident to be described, such as how many 
victims were involved and a narrative of the event. 
 The second, the victim level, demographically describes the victim, the suspect (when 
appropriate), the weapon that caused the death, and the circumstances related to his or her 
death. 
 
In addition, the system allows states to track the documents from which data are abstracted. In outline 
form, this hierarchy looks like the following: 
1. Incident:  
 Incident summary (Site ID, Incident Type, Incident Category, number nonfatally shot 
persons, number of victims) 
 Optional workflow fields (e.g., abstractor name, flag for follow-up, date supervisor 
checked incident) 
 Related incidents (those outside 24 hours or other parameters for an NVDRS incident 
but related in some other way, determined by the states; examples include serial 
homicides attributed to a common perpetrator(s) or a series of suicides thought to be 
related).  
 
2. Victim(s):  
 Extended demographics 
 Manner of death 
 Description, location, and time of injury 
 Weapon(s) that inflicted the fatal injury 
 Toxicology findings 
 Circumstances associated with the death (e.g., depressed before a suicide or an 
argument preceding the homicide) 
 
===== Page 18 =====
 
Introduction  18 | Page  
  
3. Suspect(s): 
 Demographics 
 Victim-suspect relationship 
 Additional suspect characteristics (e.g., suspect was a caregiver for this victim; suspect 
had been in contact with law enforcement) 
 
4. Special module (only applicable to school-related incidents meeting certain inclusion criteria):  
 School-Associated Violent Death (SAVD)  
 
5. Optional modules: 
 Child Fatality Review (CFR) 
 Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) 
 Overdose (OD)  
 
Note: Given all the data entry fields available to handle various scenarios, the number of variables in 
NVDRS is large. Not every section of NVDRS can be completed for every incident. For example, if one of 
the persons involved is a suspect who did not die in the incident, only limited information is collected. If 
the weapon was not a firearm, additional details regarding the weapon do not often exist, and therefore 
no detailed characteristics of non-firearm weapons are tracked in NVDRS.  
 
8.0 Data Sources 
A strength of NVDRS is its use of multiple, complementary data sources. Each state can integrate data 
across data sources using its knowledge of available resources. Prior work has shown that data across 
sources on many variables such as victim’s demographics are very similar. More comprehensive and 
accurate information can be collected on each incident by reviewing multiple sources over time as more 
information becomes available. Information on circumstances collected from both LE and C/ME reports 
varies because each source investigates different aspects of the death. Thus, tracking circumstances by 
source helps document similarities and differences between the findings of different agencies. 
 
The table below shows the sources that most often include information about different types of data 
elements in NVDRS. No PII should ever be entered into the NVDRS web-based system.  
 
Data Topic DC C/ME LE CFR LAB USER HOSP 
Case status      X  
Incident narrative  X X X    
Document tracking      X  
Person type X X X     
Zip code, county X X X     
Age/sex/race/ethnicity X X X     
When and where (injury/death) X X X     
Type of medical treatment 
(inpatient or emergency 
department) 
      X 
Cause of death ICD-10 code(s) X       
External injury ICD-9-CM code(s)       X 
Manner of death X X  X  X  
===== Page 19 =====
 
Introduction  19 | Page  
  
 
9.0 Hover over text 
Many variables in NVDRS have hover over text that becomes visible when the abstractor moves the 
cursor over the variable. This text aids abstractors in accurately entering data. They contain short one to 
two sentence descriptions about what to include/exclude when coding/entering data. These 
descriptions were first added in August 2013 and are continuously updated. 
 
10.0 Auto Filling 
Some data are auto filled to ensure accurate data entry. For instance, pregnancy status for males is 
auto-filled as “Not applicable.” 
 
11.0 Gray-out 
 
To prevent invalid data entry, the software includes automatic gray-out fields that are logically 
contingent upon another data element. For example, an abstractor cannot complete type of mental 
health problem until they identify that the decedent had a mental health problem. 
 
12.0 Additional Features 
 
Data are coded or offer lookup tables whenever possible to avoid problems with variant spellings and 
valid entries. 
 
13.0 Unknown and Inapplicable Information 
 
A standard approach is used to code “Unknown” throughout the manual. “Unk” is suggested to be 
entered for “Unknown” in any relevant text field. For numerical fields, the numbers “9,” “99,” or “999” 
are mostly used to indicate “Unknown.” Similarly, the numbers “8,” “88,” or “888” are usually used for 
“Not applicable.” See guidance regarding individual variables for correct values for each. 
 
14.0 Starting an Incident 
Refer to the software manual for instructions about how to start or create an incident, if needed. 
 
Task 1: Open a new incident in the software by selecting “Create new incident.” Select the 
Data Topic DC C/ME LE CFR LAB USER HOSP 
Additional person descriptors X X X X    
Alcohol and drug tests  X      
Wounds  X X     
Circumstances  X X X    
Victim-suspect relationship  X X X    
History of victim abuse  X X X    
Suspect was victim caretaker  X X X    
Weapon type X X X   X  
Firearm descriptors  X X  X   
Poison details  X X     
DC=death certificate; C/ME=coroner/medical examiner; LE=law enforcement report; CFR=child fatality review; 
LAB=crime lab; USER=user of NVDRS software/abstractor(s); HOSP=hospital 
===== Page 20 =====
 
Introduction  20 | Page  
  
incident year and incident type (e.g. NVDRS, NVDRS Non-Targeted Area, etc.) and then hit the 
button labeled “Create new incident” again. This will create the “shell” of the new incident.  
 
Task 2: You will now be in the “Incident Overview” area. In this section, you can add other 
victims (using “add victim” in the victim section) to the incident as appropriate (see NVDRS 
definitions of “incident” for further guidance), enter the number of persons nonfatally shot (for 
either of these that apply) in the incident, and enter information about related incidents. 
Optional workflow tracking fields such as those in the Incident Checklist and Document(s) 
sections are also included on this screen. Blank records for each victim in the incident are now 
created, and abstractors should access each one individually for the steps that follow.  
 
Task 3. Enter information for each victim in the incident on each of the five core tabs for each 
victim record. These are: 
 
1. Demographics 
2. Injury and Death 
3. Circumstances 
4. Weapon(s) 
5. Toxicology 
 
For all incidents involving one or more suspects according to case information and NVDRS case 
definitions, enter information on the Suspect(s) tab. 
 
Enter information for incidents including SAVDs on the SAVD tab. 
 
Note that the abstractor should hit “Save” when leaving each tab. Abstractors should review and 
attempt to populate all fields on tabs that apply to each case. The “Validate” function in the top 
right of the screen may also be used for error checking. 
 
C/ME and LE narrative fields appear at the bottom of the screen across tabs and can be 
minimized and maximized using the arrows at the top of each field. 
 
IPV, OD, and CFR modules are available in applicable cases at state discretion. 
 
15.0 Reabstraction Guidelines 
Reabstracting cases is an important data quality control measure for VDRS programs. The primary 
purpose of reabstraction is to identify and correct errors when coding key data elements in a timely 
manner. Another purpose is to identify data fields with low reliability (i.e., they are not completed in the 
same way by trained independent observers in a significant percentage of incidents, perhaps because of 
their inherent subjectivity). 
 
We suggest the following reabstraction guidelines: 
 Reabstraction should be done by the person who is most skilled in coding. This does not need to be 
the original abstractor’s supervisor. It should not be done by the same person who did the original 
coding. 
 The reabstractor should have access to all the original records used by the original abstractor.  
 At a minimum, the reabstractor should reabstract 5 percent of incidents completed in the previous 
===== Page 21 =====
 
Introduction  21 | Page  
  
quarter or previous month. ”Completed incidents” mean incidents that have had data entered from 
the DC, LE report, and C/ME report. 
 Reabstractors should select the incident numbers of the incidents they want to reabstract along 
with the necessary identifiers. 
 Reabstraction should start soon after the end of the first quarter of data collection and be done on 
an ongoing basis so that feedback to abstractors is timely. 
 Reabstractors will want to compare their results with the original abstractions manually by printing 
an incident or by setting up queries to do record comparisons for specified pairs of incidents. Any 
discrepancies noted should be reconciled through discussion with the original abstractor. 
 Distinguishing between the two possible sources of error: true coder disagreement and data entry 
error are important. 
 Retraining or clarifying coding instructions may help with coder disagreement, while changes in 
question format may help with data entry error. 
 Reabstractors may consider entering reabstracted cases into the training module of the NVDRS web-
based system. This will avoid case duplication within the system and will provide a helpful practice 
environment.  
 
16.0 Data Elements Key 
The next sections provide detailed information for each data element captured by NVDRS. The sections 
are organized by screens as they appear in the NVDRS software application. The data elements are 
arranged by location on the screen within each section. Each data element or group of related data 
elements begin on a new page and follow the format below: 
 Variable Label: 
Variable Name 
 Definition: 
Variable label is the short definition of the variable 
 Response Option: 
Lists all valid response options 
 Discussion: 
Provides guidance about how to code the data element or group of data elements 
 
Note: The default response option is built in for each variable in the web-based NVDRS program. 
Variables, with the exception of those that have a “Not applicable” response option, should be left 
blank/unchecked if data are unavailable. 
 
===== Page 22 =====
 
Section 1: Incident Variables  22 | Page  
  
SECTION 1. INCIDENT VARIABLES  
 
1.1 Incident Year: IncidentYear   
 
Definition: 
Year in which the incident occurred 
 
Response Option:  
Date (format: YYYY) 
 
Discussion:  
The incident year must be provided when c reating a new record or importing one. For incidents 
involving a single death, the incident year is the calendar year in which the victim died. So for example, if 
a victim was injured at the end of December 2002, but died in early January 2003, the death would be 
reported in the 2003 data year. Although the NVDRS software allows for a specific month or date of 
death to be entered as “Unknown,” the year of death must be filled in. In the case of a true unknown 
year of death (as in skeletal remains with unknown year of death, or an unattended death that may 
have occurred either shortly before or shortly after January 1st), enter the year in which the body was 
found as the year of death. 
 
If the incident involved multiple victims who died in multiple years, incident year is the first year in 
which any of the victims in the incident died. For example, if two people are shot on December 21, 2006 
and one dies on December 22, 2006 and the second dies on January 4, 2007, the year of the incident 
would be 2006. The only exception to this rule is when any of the deaths occurred in a year prior to 
2003, the first year of NVDRS. In that case, place the incident in the first year of death after 2002. Hence, 
incidents with deaths in 2002 and 2003 should be placed in 2003. Incidents with deaths in 2002 and 
2004 should be placed in 2004. Incidents with deaths in 2003 and 2004 should be placed in 2003. 
 
 
1.2 Site Identifier: SiteID 
1.3 Incident Number: IncidentNumber 
 
Definitions: 
 SiteID indicates which state has abstracted the incident. This may not be the state of injury or of 
residence of any victim in the incident as discussed in the Definitions section. The Site ID number is 
the Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) code assigned to the state, district, or U.S. 
territory. 
 IncidentNumber is automatically assigned by the software. Incidents are numbered within a year 
and state with the first one being assigned 1. Each new incident added is automatically assigned the 
next sequential number. Consequently, within each state, the first incident in 2007 and the first in 
2008 will be assigned Incident ID=1. Thus, incident number always needs to be considered within a 
state and year. 
 
Response Options: 
 SiteID is automatically generated by the program based on the abstractor’s permission when a new 
incident is created. 
 IncidentNumber is automatically generated by the program when a new incident is initiated by the 
===== Page 23 =====
 
Section 1: Incident Variables  23 | Page  
  
abstractor. 
 
Discussion: 
 Used together, the SiteID, IncidentYear, and Incident Number uniquely identify each incident and 
can be used to link incident level information with victims and documents. 
 If an incident is merged or deleted, no information will be displayed for that incident number. For 
instance, if a 2008 homicide occurring in Maryland assigned IncidentNumber 5 is later found to be 
part of a multiple homicide, and is merged into Maryland 2008 IncidentNumber 6, no information 
will be displayed for Incident Number 5. 
 The SiteID and LocationID should never be missing on a record that is displayed or exported by the 
system. 
 
 
1.4 Incident type: IncidentType 
 
Definition:   
Incident type identifies the type of incident collected by various users of the NVDRS web-based system.  
 
Response Options: 
1 NVDRS 
2 NVDRS Non-Targeted Area 
3 SUDORS 
9 Other (State-Defined) 
 
Discussion:  
 NVDRS: I ncidents collected for the National Violent Death Reportin g System. Drug overdose deaths 
of undetermined intent should be coded here.  
 NVDRS Non-Targeted Area: Incidents collected for NVDRS outside a state’s designated catchment 
area. These cases are all optional and are to be entered at the state’s discretion. The following are 
examples of cases that fall into this category: 
o Deaths where the fatal injury occurred within a state’s boundary, but in an area outside of 
th
e VDRS program’s target county or counties. This only applies to states collecting data on 
violent deaths within a selected county or counties as part of their data collection plan.  
o Cases that are part of the subset that are ONLY required to have DC data (only applies to 
states funded under Option 3 for large states).  
 SUDORS: Incidents collected for the State Unintentional Drug Overdose Reporting System. Drug 
overdose deaths of undetermined intent should be coded under “NVDRS.” 
 Other (State-Defined): Incidents collected by state or other partner organizations outside of regular 
NVDRS case definitions (e.g., sudden unexplained infant death [SUID]). These cases are all optional 
and can be entered at the VDRS program’s discretion. Resident deaths where the fatal injury 
occurred in another NVDRS state should be coded here. Please note, the state of injury occurrence 
is responsible for collecting information on the death. 
 
Note: Prior to September 2018, this variable described whether the incident involved a single victim or 
multiple ones and the manner of all victims’ deaths. Beginning in September 2018, a calculated variable, 
Incident Category, identifies whether the incident involved a single victim or multiple ones and the 
manner of all the victims’ deaths. Incident Category will be calculated automatically based on the 
victim(s) in an incident using the “manner of death” data elements. Manner of Death per abstractor is 
===== Page 24 =====
 
Section 1: Incident Variables  24 | Page  
  
checked first, but if it is missing, the NVDRS software will use the DC Manner, C/ME Manner, or LE 
Manner to assign an incident category. The field is updated whenever an incident is saved. The incident 
categories are: 
 Single Suicide 
 Single Homicide 
 Single Unintentional Firearm Death 
 Single Legal Intervention Death 
 Single Death of Undetermined Intent 
 Multiple Suicide 
 Multiple Homicide 
 Multiple Unintentional Firearm Deaths 
 Multiple Legal Intervention Deaths 
 Multiple Deaths of Undetermined Intent 
 Homicide(s) Followed by Legal Intervention Death(s) 
 Mutual Homicide/Shootout 
 Multiple Deaths – Other 
 Single Homicide Followed by Suicide 
 Homicide(s) Followed by Suicide(s), Over 2 Fatalities 
 Missing or Other Death Manner 
 
 
1.5 Incident Narrative C/ME: NarrativeCME 
1.6 Incident Narrative LE: NarrativeLE 
 
Definition:  
Narrative accounts of the incident serve multiple purposes:  
 To briefly summarize the incident (who, what, when, where, why) 
 To provide supporting information on circumstances that the abstractor has endorsed in an incident  
 To provide the context for understanding the incident 
 To record information and additional details that cannot be captured elsewhere  
 To facilitate data quality control checks for coding key variables 
 
Response Option:  
Text 
 
Discussion:  
Incident narratives are written based on a single type data source (e.g., LE or C /ME) that may involve 
single or multiple documents (e.g., C/ME and toxicology report). Consequently, there is an incident 
narrative that summarizes the law enforcement findings and an incident narrative that describes the 
C/ME’s findings. The narratives based on these separate data sources will often vary in the level of detail 
they contain, and may even differ from each other on details of the incident. 
 
Use “Victim” or “V” to refer to the victim when referring to persons in the narrative, or “V1,” “V2,” etc., 
in incidents with multiple victims. Similarly, use “Suspect” or “S1,” “S2,” etc. Victim/Suspects may be 
designated as “V/S.” 
 
At a minimum, the following should be included in all narratives: 
 The number of victims, suspects, and victim/suspects described in the source document who were 
===== Page 25 =====
 
Section 1: Incident Variables  25 | Page  
  
injured, and by whom 
 The relationship between victim and suspect if injury was not self-inflicted 
 Where the injury occurred (or the victim was found)—not a specific place or address, but a 
description such as “at home,” “at work,” or “on the street,” which is listed in the “Type of location 
where injured” data element  
 Additional details on all circumstances coded in the data source tab 
 Timing of circumstances (e.g., was the argument right before the suicide or the night before)  
 A description of other circumstances not captured in standardized coding 
 Sex and age of person(s) involved  
 Weapon(s) involved 
 
The following should NEVER be included in any narratives: 
 PII such as names of people, towns, streets, law enforcement departments, and hospitals 
 Specific dates 
 Abbreviations (with the exception of V, S, and V/S for the persons in the narrative or commonly used 
abbreviations such as DUI, ADHD) 
 Incomplete sentences (as they are hard to understand) 
 
Sometimes a data abstractor will receive two data sources in one document from data providers (e.g., a 
C/ME report contains a copy of the police report) or multiple documents from the same source (e.g., 
C/ME report on two victims in the same incident). 
 If two data sources are found in one source (i.e., the LE includes a copy of the C/ME report), 
information from both sources should be entered. In the circumstance section where LE and C/ME 
data are distinguished, the C/ME information should only be listed in the C/ME section and the LE 
information should only be listed in the LE section regardless of how the information was collected. 
 A C/ME or LE report may contain information on multiple victims or suspects involved in a violent 
incident. In these instances, the information from this report can be used to fill out information 
about both victims. LE and C/ME information, however, should always be requested for all victims. 
 
Sometimes information across or within C/ME and LE reports may provide different or conflicting 
information. 
 Because C/ME and LE circumstances come from different investigations, the C/ME and LE narratives 
are expected to provide unique insights into the violent death. Thus, the differences between the 
coding sources provide a more comprehensive understanding of the death. If the C/ME and LE 
narratives are conflicting, record the information as reported by the data sources and code the 
circumstances accordingly. 
o The one exception to this rule is when either the C/ME or LE report has clearly found, 
through further investigation, that a previous description of the event was incorrect (e.g., 
witness lied or more evidence comes to light that disproves previous conclusion). In this 
case, indicate in the narrative that provides false information that this information was 
disapproved and do not check any circumstance that was found false. 
 If multiple LE reports conflict about the narrative details, record what you believe to be the most 
accurate narrative. Do the same for multiple C/ME reports. The circumstances coded should be 
consistent with these decisions. 
 
 
  
===== Page 26 =====
 
Section 1: Incident Variables  26 | Page  
  
 
1.7 Number of source documents in incident: NumberOfDocuments 
 
Definition:  
Counts the number of source documents in the incident. This number is automatically generated by the 
program. 
 
Response Option:  
Number of documents 
 
Discussion:  
Each incident must have a minimum of one document, but should have at least three documents or one 
from each of the required data sources: 
 Death certificate   
 C/ME report  
 LE report 
 
A list of all documents can be found in the variable document type.  
 
 
1.8 Number of victims in incident: NumberOfVictims 
 
Definition:  
Number of victims counts the number of victims in the incident. The program automatically generates 
this number. 
 
Response Option: 
Number of victims 
 
Discussion:  
A minimum of one victim must be in each incident. Victims in the incident are only those who are fatally 
injured. A person may be both a suspect and a victim, as in the case of a husband who murders his wife 
and then dies by suicide. Identifying the victims in the incident is not difficult once you have determined 
how to define an incident (see Definitions section). 
 
 
1.9 Number of nonfatally shot persons in incident: NumberNonfatallyShot  
 
Definition:  
Number of persons who were nonfatally shot in the incident. 
 
Response Options:  
Number of nonfatally shot victims or one of the following: 
 0       None 
 8888 Not applicable 
 9999 Nonfatally shot victims, number unknown or unspecified 
 
Discussion: 
===== Page 27 =====
 
Section 1: Incident Variables  27 | Page  
  
 Record the total number of victims who sustained a projectile wound from a firearm during the 
course of the incident and survived. 
 Victims of pistol whipping should not be counted here. 
 Enter “0” if the incident had firearm fatalities, but there is no indication of nonfatal shooting 
victim(s). 
 Enter “8888” if the incident did not have firearm fatalities and there is no indication of nonfatal 
shooting victim(s). 
 Enter “9999” if source documents indicate that the incident had nonfatal shooting victims, but the 
number is unknown or unspecified.  
 
 
1.10 Flag this incident for follow-up: FollowUp 
 
Definition:  
The user can manually flag an incident for follow-up. These incidents can be located with the search 
function. 
 
Response Option:  
Checkbox 
 
Discussion:  
This function allows the user to indicate that an incident needs further follow-up. For instance, an 
abstractor may want to flag incidents that need clarification. Flagged incidents can be retrieved using 
the search function. 
 
 
1.11 Data Abstraction Completion Indicators 
1.11.1 Date supervisor checked incident: SupervisorCheckedDate 
1.11.2 Date supervisor rechecked incident: SupervisorRecheckedDate 
 
Definition:  
Supervisors can use these fields to track whether they have checked or finalized an incident. Problems 
or questions noted in the supervisor’s review can be placed in the activity log. 
 
Response Option:  
Date (MM/DD/YYYY) 
 
Discussion:  
Completing these fields is not required. Their sole purpose is to support the data entry and verification 
process. Missing dates are not allowed because exact dates should be known. 
 
 
1.12 Abstractor Name: AbstractorName 
 
Definition:  
List the name(s) of the abstractors working on the record. 
 
Response Option:  
===== Page 28 =====
 
Section 1: Incident Variables  28 | Page  
  
Text 
 
Discussion:  
This helps VDRS programs track who entered their data and can be used to examine data quality by 
abstractor. Multiple data abstractors can be tracked by listing their name separated by a delimiter such 
as a comma or slash (e.g., Craig / Shane). This field is not required and is provided to support data 
abstraction and data quality efforts. 
 
===== Page 29 =====
 
Section 2: Document Tracking Variables  29 | Page  
  
SECTION 2. DOCUMENT TRACKING VARIABLES  
 
 
2.1 Document unavailable: DocumentUnavailable 
 
Definition:  
Enter if the document did not exist, was unavailable to NVDRS, or could not be obtained for other 
reasons. 
 
Response Option:  
Checkbox  
 
 
2.2 Document type: DocumentType 
 
Definition:  
Document type is the type of document being requested, logged in, or tracked. Death certificate, 
medical examiner or coroner report, and police report are required documents. 
 
Response Options: 
1 Death certificate 
2 Medical examiner report 
3 Coroner report 
4 Police report 
5 SHR 
6 NIBRS 
7 Crime lab report 
8 Toxicology report 
9 Hospital discharge record 
10 ED record 
11 Gun trace 
12 EMS report 
13 CFRT report 
14 Newspaper article 
88 Other  
 
Discussion:  
None 
 
 
2.3 Source agency requested from: AgencySource 
 
Definition:  
Source agency requested from provides the agency name from which the data are being collected. This 
allows a record to be kept of the document sources used for each incident. 
 
Response Option: 
Text 
===== Page 30 =====
 
Section 2: Document Tracking Variables  30 | Page  
  
Discussion:  
This variable is optional, but can be used to help track requests. Do not enter the names of people at the 
agency or other personal identifying information in this field. 
 
 
2.4 Date record requested: Date_record_requested 
2.5 Date record re-requested: Date_record_rerequested 
2.6 Date record received: Date_record_received 
 
Definition:  
These variables allow a record to be kept of the dates each document was requested, re-requested if 
necessary, and the date received. This can be useful as an abstractor “logbook” to track the status of 
records that have been requested. 
 
Response Option: 
Date (format: MM/DD/YYYY) 
 
Discussion:  
These variables are optional, but their use is encouraged. Missing dates are not allowed because exact 
dates should be known. 
 
 
2.7 Date record abstracted/imported: AbstractedDate 
2.8 Date entered data checked: Date_entered_data_checked 
 
Definition:  
These variables record the date documents were abstracted and checked by another abstractor or their 
supervisor(s) 
 
Response Option:  
Date (format: MM/DD/YYYY) 
 
Discussion:  
These variables are optional, but their use is encouraged. They can be used for measuring timeliness by 
calculating the interval between date of death and date abstracted. Partial missing date values cannot 
be entered (e.g., 02/99/2013) because the abstractor should always know the date the incident was 
completed or checked. Please leave this field blank if you choose not to use it. 
 
 
2.9 Document notes field: DocumentNotes 
 
Definition:  
This variable allows a record to be kept of notes regarding the source document receipt process. 
Personal identifying information about the incident, victim, and suspect should NEVER be entered. 
 
Response Option: 
Text 
 
Discussion:  
===== Page 31 =====
 
Section 2: Document Tracking Variables  31 | Page  
  
This variable is optional.  
===== Page 32 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  32 | Page  
  
SECTION 3. DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES FOR VICTIMS  
 
 
3.1 Demographics, Race, and Ethnicity 
 
3.1.1 Person type: PersonType 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates whether the person was a victim of violence or both a victim and suspect (i.e., the 
person killed someone else and then died by suicide). 
 
Response Options: 
1 Victim 
3 Both victim and suspect 
 
Discussion: 
Victims (Person Type = 1) 
Victims are those who died in a suicide, violence-related homicide, or legal intervention as the result of 
a firearm injury or undetermined manner. 
 
Note: A fetus who dies as the result of direct, violent injuries sustained before birth (i.e., a fetal death) 
should not be recorded as a victim. Only babies who were delivered and lived outside the womb for any 
period of time and were issued both a birth certificate and a death certificate, OR babies who a C/ME 
has conclusively determined to have been born alive and subsequently killed should be included as 
victims. However, states that want to collect such deaths may enter these as a separate incident and 
follow the guidance as described in the Definitions section (4.0) of this document. 
 
 Example of Person Type = 1 Victim 
1. Person died by suicide and was found dead in their residence. 
 
Both Suspect/Victim (Person Type= 3) 
Suspect/Victims are victims of homicide, suicide or legal intervention, or undetermined intent who also 
killed someone else in the incident. 
 
 Examples of Person Type = 3 Suspect/Victim 
1. A man kills his wife and then dies by suicide. He is a suspect because he killed someone else 
and is a suicide victim because he died by suicide; thus, he is both suspect and victim 
(Person Type = 3). 
2. A person robs a store and kills the store clerk. While running from the store he is shot and 
killed by a law enforcement officer. The person is a suspect in the killing of the store clerk 
and is a legal intervention victim because he is killed by a law enforcement officer; thus, he 
is both suspect and victim (Person Type = 3). 
3. A husband learns his wife is having an affair with a male friend. The husband kills the male 
friend in anger. The distraught wife kills her husband. The husband is a suspect because he 
killed the male friend and is also a victim because he was then killed by his wife; thus, he is 
both suspect and victim (Person Type = 3). 
===== Page 33 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  33 | Page  
  
DO NOT CODE as a suspect/victim if the victim is a suspect in another violent incident (i.e., occurs 24 
hours after the original death). For instance, a man kills a guard during a bank robbery. Two weeks later 
the man dies by suicide when he is surrounded by police and refuses to be arrested. The person should 
be listed as a suicide victim in the incident in which he died 
 
Note: Before August 2013, this variable was also used to collect information on suspects, victims and 
victim/suspects. As of August 2013, suspect information is collected as part of the victim’s record and 
thus no longer captured by this variable.  
 
 
3.1.2 First initial of last name: LastNameFirstInitial 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates the first initial of the victim’s last name. 
 
Response Option:  
Text 
 
Discussion:  
This de-identified information can be used to match victims across data sources (e.g., LE and C/ME 
reports) and to link with identifying information maintained by states. This is an optional variable. 
 
 
3.1.3 Day of birth: BirthDayOfMonth 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates the day of the month in which the victim was born. 
 
Response Option:  
Please enter the day as a two digit number (e.g., the 6th is entered as 06 and the 21st is entered as 21). 
 
Discussion: 
This de-identified information can be used to match victims across data sources (e.g., LE and C/ME 
reports) and to link with identifying information maintained by states. This is an optional variable. 
 
 
3.1.4 Last 4 of C/ME: CMENumberLastFour 
 
Definition: 
This variable provides the last four digits on the C/ME report associated with the victim. State 
abstractors may also choose to enter less than four digits to preserve confidentiality. 
 
Response Option:  
Text 
 
Discussion:  
This de-identified information can be used to match victims across data sources (e.g., LE and C/ME 
===== Page 34 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  34 | Page  
  
reports) and to link with identifying information maintained by states. This is an optional variable. 
 
 
3.1.5 Last 4 of DC: DCNumberLastFour 
 
Definition:  
This variable provides the last  four digits on the DC record associated with the victim. State abstractors 
may also choose to enter fewer than  four digits to preserve confidentiality. 
 
Response Option:  
Text 
 
Discussion:  
This de-identified information can be used to match victims across data sources (e.g., LE and C/ME 
reports) and to link with identifying information maintained by states. This is an optional variable. 
 
 
3.1.6 Sex of victim: Sex 
 
Definition:  
The victim’s sex at the time of the incident 
 
Response Options: 
1 Male 
2 Female 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Sex captures the sex of the victim according to the DC. If the victim is transgender, please record sex as 
indicated by at least one of the three primary data collection sources: DC, C/ME report, or LE report.  
  
 
3.1.7 Transgender: Transgender 
  
Definition:  
The victim self-identifies as transgender or a friend/family member reports that the victim self-identified 
as transgender. 
 
Response Option:  
Checkbox 
 
Discussion:  
Transgender is defined as people “who experience incongruence between birth sex and gender 
identity.”1 For instance, a person born a male may identify themselves as female. A person should be 
identified as transgender if he or she identified as transgender or family, friends, physician, or other 
acquaintances identified the person as transgender. Also, check this variable if the victim was 
undergoing or had undergone surgery or hormone therapy to support a sex reassignment. 
===== Page 35 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  35 | Page  
  
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013. 
 
1 Badgett MVL, Goldberg N. Best practices for asking questions about sexual orientation on surveys. Los 
Angeles (CA): The Williams Institute; 2009.  
 
 
3.1.8 Age: Age 
3.1.9 Age Unit: AgeUnit 
 
Definitions: 
 Age: Age of victim at death 
 AgeUnit: Type of unit (e.g., years, hours) used to report age 
 
Response Options:  
 Age      Numeric  
999      Unknown 
 
 Age Unit 
1 Years  
2 Months 
3 Weeks 
4  Days 
5  Hours 
6 Minutes 
9  Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
Age is reported using the same conventions that vital statistics data uses to facilitate more precise 
reporting of newborn and infant ages: 
 It is reported in two variables: “Age” identifies the number of years, months, or other units of the 
victim, and “AgeUnit” identifies the type of unit used. So, for example, a 3 month-old baby has an 
Age of 3 and an AgeUnit of 2 (months). 
 Age should be reported in years for victims who are 1 year or older. 
 For victims, use the age at the time of death. 
 In some cases, the victim’s exact age will not be known. If so, please apply the rules below to code 
age: 
1. If age is provided within a 5-year range or less, choose the midpoint of the range and round to 
the lower year if the midpoint calculation results in a half year. For example, a suspect reported 
to be 20 to 25 years of age would be entered as 22. 
2. If an age range of >5 years is provided, enter the age as unknown.  
3. Do not calculate age from date of birth and date of incident. 
4. If age is not provided, code as “999” for “Unknown.” 
 
 
3.1.10 Height feet: HeightFeet 
3.1.11 Height inches: HeightInches 
3.1.12 Weight: Weight  
===== Page 36 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  36 | Page  
  
 
Definitions: 
 HeightFeet & HeightInches: Victim’s height is reported in two variables and data are recorded 
separately for feet and inches. 
 Weight: Victim’s weight in pounds (If conversion for weight is required, 2.2 pounds =1 kilogram) at 
the time of death. 
 
Response Options:  
Select number of feet and number of inches separately from drop down menus. 
 Heightfeet 
0 to 9 Feet 
99  Unknown 
 
 Heightinches 
0 to 11 Inches 
99  Unknown 
 
 Weight  
Enter number of pounds (range=000–998)  
999  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Please enter “99” for height and/or “99” for inches if the victim’s height is missing for feet or inches. 
Please enter “999” if a victim’s weight is missing.  
 
Note: These variables were added in August 2013.  
 
 
3.1.13 Victim Race Variables 
3.1.13.1 White: RaceWhite 
3.1.13.2 Black or African American: RaceBlack 
3.1.13.3 Asian: RaceAsian 
3.1.13.4 Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander: RacePacificIslander 
3.1.13.5 American Indian or Alaska Native: RaceAmericanIndian 
3.1.13.6 Unspecified race: RaceUnspecified  
 
Definitions: Race± 
 RaceWhite: Person with origins among any of the original peoples of Europe, North Africa, or the 
Middle East 
 RaceBlack: Person with origins among any of the Black racial groups of Africa 
 RaceAsian: Person with origins among any of the original people of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or 
the Indian subcontinent 
 RacePacificIslander: Person with origins among any of the original people of the Pacific Islands 
(includes Native Hawaiians) 
 RaceAmericanIndian: Person with origins among any of the original people of North America and 
who maintains cultural identification through tribal affiliation or community recognition (includes 
Alaska Natives) 
 RaceUnspecified: If a person’s ethnicity is provided in place of their race, e.g., race is given as 
===== Page 37 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  37 | Page  
  
“Hispanic,” and no other valid race value is given, mark race as “Unspecified.” 
 
Response Option:  
Checkbox 
 
Discussion:  
For multiracial decedents, please check each race identified in source documents (e.g., if the decedent is 
identified as “white” and “Asian,” please check “white” and “Asian”). If “Asian/Pacific Islander” is 
indicated, check both “Asian” and “PacificIslander.” The U.S. Census Bureau used these standards in the 
2000 decennial census. 
 
Note: “Other” race category was removed as a response choice in 2015. 
 
±NVDRS follows U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB) standards for race/ethnicity categorization. HHS guidance on race/ethnicity is available 
from http://aspe.hhs.gov/datacncl/standards/ACA/4302/index.shtml.  
 
 
3.1.14 Hispanic/Latino/Spanish: Ethnicity 
 
Definition:  
Ethnicity± is a concept used to differentiate population groups based on shared cultural characteristics 
or geographic origins. In NVDRS, victims with Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central or South American, 
or other Spanish culture or origin should be considered Hispanic or Latino, regardless of race. 
 
Response Options: 
0 Not Hispanic or Latino 
1 Hispanic or Latino 
9 Unknown  
 
Discussion:  
None  
 
±NVDRS follows HHS and OMB standards for race/ethnicity categorization. HHS guidance on 
race/ethnicity is available from http://aspe.hhs.gov/datacncl/standards/ACA/4302/index.shtml. 
 
 
3.1.15 Marital status: MaritalStatus  
 
Definition:  
This variable describes the victim’s marital status. 
 
Response Options: 
1 Married/Civil Union/Domestic Partnership 
2 Never Married 
3 Widowed 
4 Divorced 
5 Married/Civil Union/Domestic Partnership, but separated  
===== Page 38 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  38 | Page  
  
6 Single, not otherwise specified 
9 Unknown (Note: If marital status is not explicitly noted, code as “9,” “Unknown.”) 
 
Discussion:  
Marital status is regularly completed on the DC and often noted in LE or C/ME reports. 
 Marital status should be completed for persons of all ages, including children. 
 If a source document describes a person as being in a common-law marriage or civil union according 
to the laws of that state, code as “Married/Civil Union/Domestic Partnership.” 
 If a source document describes a person being in a committed relationship with someone of the 
same sex, code as “Married/Civil Union/Domestic Partnership.” Domestic partnership is defined as a 
committed intimate relationship between two adults of either the same or opposite sex, in which 
the partners are each other’s sole partner, intend to remain so indefinitely, maintain a common 
residence, and intend to continue to do so. They are not married or joined in a civil union or are a 
domestic partner to anyone else, and are not related in a way that would prohibit legal marriage in 
the U.S. jurisdiction in which the partnership was formed.±  
 Use the “Single, not otherwise specified” option when this term is used in C/ME reports and it is 
unclear whether the person was never married, widowed, divorced, or separated. 
 If a person kills his or her spouse or partner, marital status should be coded as “Married/Civil 
Union/Domestic Partnership,” not “Widowed.” Use “Widowed” for a person of either sex whose 
spouse has died before the violent death. 
 
Note: “Domestic Partnership” was added to this variable in March 2015. 
±This is based in part on the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) definition of Domestic 
Partnership. Source: http://www.opm.gov/faqs/QA.aspx?fid=3f64bd3d-11 07-44e7-9962-
c8b652848f14&pid=a9bc0ec4-5116-45e4-aff3-baab937208c7. 
 
 
3.1.16 Relationship Status: RelationshipStatus 
 
Definition: 
Victim’s relationship status at the time of incident  
 
Response Options: 
1 Currently in a relationship 
2 Not currently in a relationship 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
The victim’s relationship with another person(s) is described as a relationship beyond the level of 
friendship that may be serious, casual, short-, or long-term. The relationship also involves some level of 
intimacy that may or may not be sexual in nature. Relationship status should only be inferred from 
marital status information on the DC or other source documents if the victim is married at the time of 
the incident; otherwise, this information must be noted in either the C/ME or LE report. Code 
“Unknown” if information about the victim being in a relationship is not explicitly stated in either report.  
 If victim’s marital status is “Married/Civil Union/Domestic Partnership,” you can infer that the victim 
was in a relationship at the time of incident. 
 If victim’s marital status is “Married/Civil Union/Domestic Partnership, but separated,” code as 
“Unknown,” unless information is provided to suggest victim was in a relationship at the time of 
===== Page 39 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  39 | Page  
  
incident.  
 If victim is noted to be in multiple relationships, code as “Currently in a relationship.”  
 Regardless of the victim’s age, code “Unknown” if victim’s relationship status is not mentioned in 
the C/ME or LE report.  
 If the time of injury occurs within 24 hours of a break up between the victim and his/her partner, 
code as “Currently in a relationship.” If the time of injury occurs more than 24 hours after a break 
up, code as “Not currently in a relationship.” 
 
Note: Variable was added in March 2015. 
 
 
3.1.17 Sex of Partner: SexOfPartner 
 
Definition: 
Sex of the victim’s partner in relation to the victim’s sex 
 
Response Options: 
1 Same sex as victim 
2 Opposite sex of victim 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
 I f the victim’s marital status  is “Married/Civil Union/ Domestic Partnership” and the victim is also in 
another relationship (e.g., extra-marital affair), code this variable based on the sex of the partner to 
whom the victim is married. 
 If the victim is no ted to be in multiple relationships at the time of the incident, code as “Unknown” 
unless the narrative captures sex of one of the partners. If more than one partner is discussed, 
capture the sex of the partner that is most salient, given the context of the incident. 
 If re lationship status is “Unknown,” sex of partner = “Unknown.” 
 
Note: Variable was added in March 2015. 
 
 
3.1.18 Victim was pregnant: Pregnant 
 
Definition:  
Victim was pregnant or recently pregnant at the time of death. 
 
Response Options: 
0 Not pregnant within last year 
1 Pregnant at time of death 
2 Not pregnant but pregnant w/in 42 days of death 
3 Not pregnant but pregnant 43 days to 1 year before death 
4 Not pregnant, not otherwise specified 
5 Pregnant, not otherwise specified 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown if pregnant within past year 
===== Page 40 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  40 | Page  
  
 
Discussion:  
This variable is used to identify pregnant or recently pregnant victims and to document types of violence 
against pregnant and postpartum women. Victim’s pregnancy status is often noted on the DC and in the 
C/ME report. Findings are more likely to be authoritative if a full autopsy has been performed. 
 
 This variable should be coded for all female victims regardless of age. 
 The variable will not apply to males and will automatically be coded as “8,” “Not applicable.” 
 This variable is based on the codes used on the new U.S. standard DC. As such, it collects pregnancy 
status at the time of death, not at the time of injury. 
 If your state’s DC has a pregnancy variable that does not match the NCHS national standard, use the 
4 and 5 options to capture this information or use another data source to code this category. 
 Regardless of the victim’s age, code “Unknown if pregnant within past year” if the victim’s 
pregnancy status is not mentioned on the C/ME report and not completed on the DC. 
 
 
3.1.19 Sexual orientation: SexualOrientation 
 
Definition:  
This variable is used to report sexual orientation, which includes heterosexual, gay, lesbian, or bisexual. 
 
Response Options: 
0 Straight/Heterosexual 
1 Gay 
2 Lesbian 
3 Bise xual 
4  Unspecified sexual minority 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Sexual orientation is a multi-component construct that is commonly measured in three ways: attraction 
(e.g., the sex of a person one is sexually attracted to); behavior (e.g., ask respondents to report on the 
sex of people with whom they had willing sexual experiences); and self-identification (e.g., how would 
you describe your sexual orientation).2 
 
In NVDRS, this variable captures whether the victim self-identified as heterosexual, gay, lesbian, or 
bisexual based on interviews of friends, family, or acquaintances. Only code this variable if the 
information is reported in the LE or C/ME report. Sexual orientation should not be inferred from marital 
status. Select “Unknown” if the information is not explicitly reported. Currently, this information is not 
usually collected systematically so consequently, this variable will only likely detect decedents who were 
gay, lesbian, or bisexual according to friends, families, or acquaintances. Definitive information about 
sexual orientation may be unavailable. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013. 
 
2 Badgett MVL, Goldberg N. Best practices for asking questions about sexual orientation on surveys. Los 
Angeles (CA): The Williams Institute; 2009. 
 
===== Page 41 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  41 | Page  
  
 
3.1.20 Current or former military personnel: Military 
 
Definition: 
Has the person ever served in the U.S. Armed Forces? 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Military status is indicated on the DC in the section captioned, “Ever a member of U.S. Armed Forces.±” If 
a state’s DC has the variant wording, “If U.S. War veteran, specify war,” a blank or missing response 
should be coded as “Unknown” rather than “No.” 
 
Note: Prior to 2010, the label for this data element was “Veteran status.” The label was changed in 2010 
to reflect the actual wording on the standard DC.  
 
±U.S. Armed Forces comprises five armed service branches: Air Force, Army, Coast Guard, Marine Corps, 
and Navy.  
 
 
3.2 Place of Residence, Birthplace, Industry, Occupation, and Education 
 
3.2.1 Residence Variables 
3.2.1.1 Country of residence: Country 
3.2.1.2 State of residence: ResidenceState 
3.2.1.3 County of residence: ResidenceCounty 
3.2.1.4 City of residence: ResidenceCity 
3.2.1.5 ZIP code of residence: ResidenceZip 
3.2.1.6 US Census tract of residence: ResidenceCensusTract 
3.2.1.7 US Census block group of residence: ResidenceCensusBlock 
 
Definitions:  
Residential information is collected at numerous levels (see below) to help support identifying the 
agency responsible for public health interventions, undertake geocoding, better target interventions, 
and to calculate population-based injury rates. 
 Country: Residential country of victim 
 ResidenceState: Residential U.S. state or territory of victim  
 ResidenceCounty: Residential county (or county equivalent) address of victim  
 ResidenceCity: Residential city address of the victim (“place” code)  
 ResidenceZip: Residential zip code 
 ResidenceCensusTract: U.S. Census tract of victim’s residence 
 ResidenceCensusBlock: U.S. Census block group of victim’s residence 
 
Response Options: 
===== Page 42 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  42 | Page  
  
 Country 
Start typing country name to activate auto-complete 
 
 ResidenceState  
Start typing the state name or INCITS 38-2009 (formerly FIPS code)† 
88  Not applicable 
99  Unknown 
 
 ResidenceCounty  
Start typing the county name or INCITS 31-2009 (formerly FIPS code)††  
888  Not applicable 
999  Unknown 
 
 ResidenceCity 
Start typing the city name or FIPS 55-3 or Census Code†††  
88888 Not applicable 
99998 Rural 
99999 Unknown 
 
 ResidenceZip 
Enter 5-digit zip code  
88888 Not applicable 
99999 Unknown 
 
 ResidenceCensusTract  
Enter 4-digit census tract and when applicable two-digits on right side of the decimal point†††† 
9999.99 Unknown 
 
 ResidenceCensusBlock  
Enter the one-digit block group number†††† 
Leave blank if Unknown 
 
†State codes are unchanged between FIPS and INCITS 38-2009. 
 
††County codes from FIPS have been carried over into INCITS 31-2009. For missing codes, search for the 
correct code at the following website: https://www.census.gov/library/reference/code-lists/ansi.html. 
These codes are provided for U.S. county and ”county equivalent” areas (i.e., parishes, boroughs, the 
District of Columbia, independent cities). 
 
†††Though the U.S. Geological Survey officially replaced FIPS 55-3 with INCITS 446-2008 
http://www.itl.nist.gov/fipspubs/55new/nav-top-fr.htm, N VDRS will continue using the standard FIPS 55 -
3 to facilitate data import and to maintain consistency and familiarity. 
 
†
†††Census tract and census block group information may be obtained using the Census Geocoder Tool 
from the following website: https://geocoding.geo.census.gov/geocoder/geographies/address?form. 
From the toolbar on the left side of the screen (options), select the “Find Geographies Using” option. 
Then click on the "Address" tab and type in the street address from the Death Certificate. This will elicit 
Census Tract and Block Group data directly. 
===== Page 43 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  43 | Page  
  
Census tract and block group information can also be obtained for multiple addresses at one time. Click 
on the following link: http://geocoding.geo.census.gov/geocoder/geographies/addressbatch?form. To 
perform the batch processing of addresses, create a Comma-Separated Values (CSV) file and upload it in 
the “select address file” field. An example of what the CSV file should contain is listed at the following 
link: http://geocoding.geo.census.gov/geocoder/Addresses.csv.  
 
Discussion:  
Use place of residence from the DC. This should include tourists, itinerants, part-time residents, etc.: 
 The address information should be collected at the local level in a format that meets the local 
standards for geocoding. 
 The program will automatically enter “88” for “Not applicable” if the person is not a resident of a 
U.S. state or territory.  
 An American Indian reservation should be coded as the state in which it is located. If the reservation 
spans multiple states, code based on state borders. 
 This website http://www.census.gov/geo/reference/ansi.html supplies FIPS place and county codes 
for out-of-state addresses: http://www.census.gov/geo/reference/ansi.html  
 Notes on persons under institutional care: 
o If a person is currently residing in a short-term facility (expected to return to his or her 
residence after a stay of generally no more than 3 months) such as a rehabilitation hospital, 
drug treatment program, jail, etc. use his or her home address as the residential address. 
Only use the address of the facility if no home address is noted. 
o If a person is residing in a long-term facility such as a college dormitory, prison, or 
residential nursing home use the facility’s address.   
 
 
3.2.2 Birth place: BirthPlace 
 
Definition:  
Birth state, territory, or country 
 
Response Options:  
Start typing U.S. state abbreviation (e.g., GA for Georgia), full state name (e.g., Georgia), or a listed 
country name (e.g., Canada, Cuba, or Mexico), or a U.S. territory. The full list of categories is provided 
below: 
 
1  Alabama 
2 Alaska 
3 Arizona 
4 Arkansas 
5 California 
6 Colorado 
7 Connecticut 
8 Delaware 
9 District of Columbia  
10  Florida 
11 Georgia 
12 Hawaii 
13 Idaho 
14 Illinois 
15 Indiana 
16 Iowa 
17 Kansas 
18 Kentucky 
19 Louisiana 
20 Maine 
21 Maryland 
22 Massachusetts 
23 Michigan 
24 Minnesota 
25 Mississippi 
26 Missouri 
27 Montana 
28 Nebraska 
29 Nevada 
30 New Hampshire 
31 New Jersey 
32 New Mexico 
33 New York 
34 N orth Carolina 
35 North Dakota 
36 Ohio 
37 Oklahoma 
38 Oregon 
39 Pennsylvania 
===== Page 44 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  44 | Page  
  
40 Rhode Island 
41 South Carolina 
42 South Dakota 
43 Tennessee 
44 Texas 
45 Utah 
46 Vermont 
47 Virginia 
48 Washington 
49 West Virginia 
50 Wisconsin 
51 Wyoming 
52 Puerto Rico 
53 Virgin Islands 
54 Guam 
55 Canada 
56 Cuba 
57 Mexico 
59  Remainder of the 
world (specify in 
birthplace text)  
61  American Samoa 
62  Northern Marianas 
99  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
The place of birth is indicated on the DC. If the victim was not born in the United States or one of the 
listed countries, enter “59 – Remainder of the world” and specify the victim’s country of birth in the 
field, “Country of birth,” if not listed. 
 
Note: The code list used for place of birth is not an FIPS code list; it is a National Center for Health 
Statistics code list. 
 
 
3.2.3 Birth country, if other: BirthCountryOther 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates the victim’s country of birth if not the United States and not on the list of other 
countries in the variable “Birth place.” 
 
Response Option:  
Text 
 
Discussion:  
Please enter the country of birth in this field for victims not born in the United States or in one of the 
countries listed in the code list for “Birth place” (i.e., coded “59 – Remainder of world”). 
 
 
3.2.4 Usual Occupation Variables 
3.2.4.1 Kind of business/industry code: Industry 
3.2.4.2 Usual industry text: IndustryText 
3.2.4.3 Usual occupation code: UsualOccupation 
3.2.4.4 Usual occupation text: OccupationText 
 
Definitions: 
“Usual industry” is the kind of business or industry to which the victim’s occupation is related, such as 
insurance, farming, or government. 
 Industry: Victim’s usual business/industry code as recorded on the DC 
 IndustryText: Victim’s usual business/industry text as recorded on the DC 
 UsualOccupation: Usual occupation of the victim as recorded on the DC 
 OccupationText: Usual occupation text of the victim as recorded on the DC 
 
Response Options:  
Provide the usual industry and occupation codes of the person as recorded on the DC.± 
===== Page 45 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  45 | Page  
  
 
080 If text only: indicates the actual code is not available. 
090 U nknown, N/A, or blank 
 
Discussion:  
Most states’ registry of vital records encodes the decedent’s usual occupation and industry on the DC. 
Usual occupation/industry is not necessarily the victim’s current occupation/industry. Provide 
information exactly as it appears in the DC data. Sites should NOT code the information themselves, as 
industry and occupation coding requires special training: 
 
 The codes “999” for occupation and “090” for industry are assigned by the Occupation and Industry 
coder to indicate “blank, “Unknown,” or “Not applicable.” These codes should only be used if they 
appear in the DC data. 
 If the text descriptor is recorded on the DC and a numeric code is not provided, report only the text 
information and use the code “080” to indicate that the actual code is not available. 
 If the DC is blank (e.g., both code and text information is blank or missing), use the code “080” to 
indicate “Unavailable” and use the text field to indicate blank, “Unknown,” or “Not available.” 
 
±Occupation codes recorded on the death certificate are based on the U.S. Census Bureau’s Industry 
and Occupation Codes.  See  
https://www.census.gov/topics/employment/industry-occupation/guidance/code-lists.html.  
 
 
3.2.5 Current occupation: OccupationCurrentText 
 
Definition:  
Occupation is an indicator of socioeconomic status. Certain occupations may also be associated with the 
occurrence of suicide or homicide. 
 
Response Options: 
Enter victim’s current occupation in free text OR enter: 
 Employed, specific occupation unknown  
 Unemployed 
 Homemaker  
 Retired  
 Student  
 Disabled 
 Self-employed 
 N/A (under age 14)  
 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Report the current occupation in a text field exactly as it appears in one of the required data sources. 
The information can later be coded at the national level using Standard Occupational Classifications. 
Note that “Current occupation” is different from “Usual occupation” recorded on the DC. If the victim is 
unemployed, enter one of the standard text options listed above. These are not currently available on a 
drop-down menu so please be careful to enter them exactly as they appear under “Response Options” 
and not in an abbreviated version. 
===== Page 46 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  46 | Page  
  
 
 People who work 17.5 hours or more per week are considered employed; people who work less 
than that are not. 
 The current occupation for victims under the age of 14 should be listed as “N/A” unless the C/ME 
report lists an occupation. 
 
 
3.2.6 Homeless: Homeless 
 
Definition:  
This variable is an indicator of the victim’s homeless status. Persons experiencing homelessness are 
those who reside in one of the following: 1) places not designed for or ordinarily used as a regular 
sleeping accommodation for human beings, including a car or other private vehicle, park, on the street 
or other outdoor place, abandoned building (i.e., squatting), bus or train station, airport, or camping 
ground; or 2) a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter or drop-in center designated to provide 
temporary living arrangements, congregate shelters, or temporary accommodations provided by a 
homeless shelter (e.g., a motel room provided because the shelter was full). 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
Marking this variable “Yes” means that there was clear evidence in a document that the victim was 
experiencing homelessness, such as living in a car. Examples of coding Homeless “Yes”: 
 
 Victim had been living in his car since his wife discovered he had relapsed on meth and kicked him 
out of the family home. 
 Victim had been staying at a local shelter for persons experiencing homelessness for the past 3 
months. 
 Victim lived in an abandoned house or building along with several other persons experiencing 
homelessness. 
 Victim was residing in a tent on a local campground. 
 
If you code Homeless as “Yes,” you must code “Injured at victim’s home” as “No.” A person cannot be 
experiencing homelessness if they were injured at home. Being injured at a shelter, on the street, in 
their car or makeshift quarters in an outdoor setting is not considered being injured at home. 
 
Victims who have no homes of their own, but are staying indefinitely with friends or family, live in a 
hotel, or have a residential address that is not a shelter are not considered to be experiencing 
homelessness. Examples of coding Homeless “No”:  
 Victim had been staying at a motel after being evicted 2 weeks ago. 
 Victim had recently retired and had been residing and traveling in a motor home (i.e., RV) that she 
owns. 
 Victim was a long-distance trucker and lived in a cabin in his truck when not driving. 
 Victim and her husband had recently been evicted and were staying with a friend until they could 
find housing.  
===== Page 47 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  47 | Page  
  
 Victim had recently sold her house and was staying at a hotel until a new house she had recently 
purchased was ready. 
 Victim was due to be evicted from his apartment in 3 days and did not have any place to stay once 
evicted. 
 
Code Homeless as “Unknown” when the residential address is stated as “Unknown” and homeless status 
is not otherwise known. Otherwise, mark this variable “No.” 
 
Note: Homeless and Housing Instability are mutually exclusive and should NOT be coded together as 
“Yes” to indicate a victim’s current housing status. Coding Homeless as (1) “Yes” automatically means 
Housing instability should be coded as (0) “No.” The Homeless variable is intended to represent victims 
who have no fixed address AND have no place to live. 
 
3.2.7 Housing instability: HousingInstability 
 
Definition:  
Acute or chronic instability in the victim’s housing situation appears to have contributed to the victim’s 
death. 
 
Response Options:  
0  No  
1  Yes 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
This code is intended to represent victims who are not experiencing homelessness, but who lack the 
resources or support networks to obtain or retain permanent housing. Housing instability has no 
standard definition, but includes numerous interrelated challenges such as trouble paying rent, 
overcrowding, moving frequently, or staying with relatives.± It may be evidenced by: 
 
 Frequent moves because of economic reasons 
 Living temporarily in the home of another because of economic or interpersonal hardship 
 A series of short stays with different friends or family members (a.k.a., “couch surfing”) with no 
other more permanent residence 
 Living in transitional housing, including correctional half-way housing 
 Temporarily living in housing provided by nonprofit organizations such as that provided by voucher 
programs 
 Living in a structure that is not traditionally residential (e.g., an office building, cab of truck, or a 
house under renovation or construction) 
 Living in a hotel or motel 
 Having been recently asked to move out by a family member or friend with whom the victim was 
temporarily living 
 Not having a permanent place to stay following an eviction or other loss of housing. Note that the 
eviction/loss of housing itself is not enough to endorse this code—an inability to obtain long-term 
housing in the aftermath or anticipated aftermath of the eviction/loss of housing must have been 
stated 
 
± https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topics-objectives/topic/social-determinants-
===== Page 48 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  48 | Page  
  
health/interventions-resources/housing-instability 
 
Examples of persons experiencing housing instability include the following scenarios: 
 Victim was kicked out of her home by her parents after stealing money to support her drug 
addiction and was living in a friend’s basement. 
 Victim and her children had moved three times in the previous year due to being evicted twice and 
their apartment building closing because it was deemed unsafe by inspectors. 
 Victim had lost his eligibility for public housing when he went to prison and was unable to find a 
place to stay long-term when he was released. He had been residing with a series of family members 
and friends but had no place to stay starting the following week. 
 Victim had recently experienced homelessness, but was allowed to stay in an unoccupied house for 
1 week. 
 Victim checked into a motel 1 day after discharge from a hospital and died that day. In the hospital, 
he told staff he did not have a permanent place to live and had been living in motels.  
 Victim was sleeping on a friend’s couch after being kicked out of his home by his wife who was fed 
up with his drinking and said she was going to file for divorce. 
 Victim was evicted 2 weeks prior to dying by suicide and was living in a motel.   
 Victim was noted to have lived in various hotels for days at a time, with nothing further noted 
regarding their living situation or a more permanent address. 
 Victim lived part-time at his girlfriend's home and part-time in motels.   
 Victim lived in an apartment provided by a nonprofit organization serving persons experiencing 
homelessness.  
 Victim lived in an office building with permission from the building owner. 
 Victim had recently been kicked out of his home by his roommates and was experiencing 
homelessness. Several days prior, victim’s roommates allowed him to move back in until his 
upcoming deportation. 
 
 Code “No” if it is unclear in the source documents that the victim was experiencing housing 
instability and their housing situation appears to have contributed to their death. 
 Code “No” if homeless was endorsed as “Yes.” Homeless and housing instability are mutually 
exclusive and should NOT be coded together as “Yes” to indicate a victim’s current housing status. 
 Code “Unknown” if source documents do not include a narrative that could provide evidence that 
the victim was experiencing housing instability and their housing situation appears to have 
contributed to their death. Also, code “Unknown” if, based on the limited information provided in 
the source documents, it is unknown if the victim was experiencing housing instability.  
 
The following housing situations do not meet criteria for “Housing instability” because they would be 
considered stable housing:  
 
 Own Single Room Occupancy (SRO) room (no services)  
 Supportive SRO (services on site)  
 Detox facility  
 Intermediate care facility  
 Own apartment or house  
 Parent/guardian’s apartment or house (long-term)  
 Other family member’s apartment or house (long-term)  
 Someone else’s apartment or house (long-term)  
 Boarding house or board-and-care  
===== Page 49 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  49 | Page  
  
 Group home  
 Treatment or recovery program (drug/alcohol rehabilitation) 
 Long-term alcohol/drug-free facility  
 Long-term hospitalization (medical or psychiatric) 
 Nursing home  
 Jail or prison  
 
Note: Housing instability and Homeless are mutually exclusive and should NOT be coded together as 
“Yes” to indicate a victim’s current housing status. Coding Housing instability as (1) “Yes” automatically 
means Homeless should be coded as (0) “No.” The Housing instability variable is intended to represent 
victims who are not experiencing homelessness but who lack the resources or support networks to 
obtain or retain permanent or stable housing. 
 
 
3.2.8 Education by degree: EducationLevel 
 
Definition:  
Represents victim’s educational level as measured by the highest degree attained. 
 
Response Options: 
0 8th grade or less 
1 9th to 12th grade, no diploma 
2 High school graduate or GED completed 
3 Some college credit, but no degree 
4 Associate’s degree (e.g., AA, AS) 
5 Bachelor’s degree (e.g., BA, AB, BS) 
6 Master’s degree (e.g., MA, MS, MEd, MSW, MBA, MPH) 
7 Doctorate (e.g., PhD, EdD) or professional degree (e.g., MD, DDS, DVM, JD) 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
The options for the “Education” variables are on the 2003 DC. The pre-2003 education format is 
provided in the “Number years education” variable because not all states may have moved to the new 
format. Only one of the two (either EducationLevel OR EducationYears) has to be completed: 
 
 Vocational and trade school should be coded as “High school graduate or GED completed.” 
 Code “0” or “8th grade or less” for very young children who are not in school. 
 
 
3.2.9 Education by number years: EducationYears 
 
Definition:  
This variable represents victim’s educational level as measured by years of formal education completed 
beyond kindergarten (e.g., completing 8th grade would be recorded as 8 years of education). 
 
Response Options:  
Numeric  
0 to 17 Years 
===== Page 50 =====
 
Section 3: Demographic Variables for Victims  50 | Page  
  
99  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Select the number of years of education completed by the victim beginning with the 1st grade. Do not 
count pre-kindergarten or kindergarten. The options for the “Education” variables are those on the 2003 
DC. The pre-2003 education format is provided in this variable because not all states may have moved to 
the new format. Only one of the two variables (either “EducationLevel” or “EducationYears”) has to be 
completed. 
 
Note: Use code “0” for very young children who are not in school. 
===== Page 51 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   51 | Page  
   
SECTION 4. INJURY AND DEATH VARIABLES  
 
4.1 Manner of Death Variables 
4.1.1 Manner of death on DC: DeathMannerDC 
4.1.2 Manner of death per LE: DeathMannerLE 
4.1.3 Manner of death per C/ME: DeathMannerCME 
4.1.4 Manner of death per abstractor: DeathMannerAbstractor 
 
Definitions: 
 DeathMannerDC: Manner of death on DC 
 DeathMannerLE: Manner of death recorded in LE report  
 DeathMannerC/ME: Manner of death recorded in C/ME report 
 DeathMannerAbstractor: Manner of death based on abstractor review of all available data 
 
Response Options:  
 DeathMannerDC  
 DeathMannerLE  
 DeathMannerC/ME 
1 Natural 
2 Accident 
3 Suicide 
4 Homicide 
5 Pending investigation 
6 Could not be determined 
7  Legal intervention 
9  Record not available or blank 
 
 DeathMannerAbstractor 
1  Suicide or intentional self-harm  
2  Homicide 
3 Unintentional firearm - self-inflicted 
4 Unintentional firearm - inflicted by other person  
5  Unintentional firearm - unknown who inflicted 
6  Legal intervention (by police or other authority)  
7  Terrorism homicide 
8 Terrorism suicide 
9 Undetermined intent 
10  Other unintentional death (outside NVDRS case definition) 
11 Unintentional poisoning 
99 Missing 
 
Discussion:  
When completing the manner of death, abstractors must record the Manner of Death exactly as it is 
reported on the DC, and C/ME and LE reports. They must also select an NVDRS manner of death, 
referred to as abstractor manner that must be consistent with the manner of death reported in at least 
one of the three required data sources: DC, and C/ME and LE reports. 
===== Page 52 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   52 | Page  
   
Manner of Death on C/ME, DC, and LE  
Manner of death is a broad classification of the cause of death as natural, accidental, suicide, homicide, 
pending investigation, or undetermined intent. Manner is determined by the coroner or medical 
examiner and, when considered in conjunction with the narrative cause of death statements on the DC, 
is the basis for how the official underlying cause of death is coded in vital statistics data. Data describing 
the manner of death are useful for public health surveillance, health care planning and administration, 
clinical and health services, and epidemiologic research. Documenting manner by source is useful 
because the C/ME’s manner of death sometimes differ from the manner implied by the death 
certificate’s underlying cause of death code or from the law enforcement designation of the death. 
Therefore, abstractors must:  
 
 Record the manner of death exactly as it appears on the DC and C/ME report. 
 If a manner is noted as “Pending investigation,” check back on the case later to update the manner. 
“Pending” is considered a temporary designation. 
 Code “Legal intervention” only if it is presented on the DC because states’ death certificates may 
have added their own code to indicate it as the manner of death. (The abstractor-assigned type of 
death variable can capture legal intervention deaths that are not coded on the DC in that fashion).   
 Record the manner from the C/ME report. Do NOT use the DC manner for the C/ME manner field 
even if the DC is found in the C/ME report.  
 
Assigning Abstractor Manner of Death 
The abstractor assigns this manner of death based on reading the DC, and C/ME and LE reports about 
the death and applying the NVDRS case definitions. In general, the data sources will agree on the 
manner of the death (e.g., C/ME, LE, and DC indicate homicide) and the abstractor manner should 
match or be consistent with the three reports. When the case is initiated, often with the DC, the 
abstractor should immediately enter an abstractor manner consistent with the available data source, 
and then update the manner as more information becomes available. Do NOT wait to receive all three 
data sources before completing the abstractor manner. 
 
In some cases, the manner of death may vary across the data sources (e.g., LE reports homicide and 
C/ME reports suicide), or the manner assigned to the death may be different than the manner indicated 
by the NVDRS case definition.  
 
The following provides guidance about how to handle these types of situations: 
 
 If an abstractor assigns a manner of death that does not coincide with the C/ME’s, it must be 
consistent with a manner of death on at least one other document. 
 Incidents where the manner used by the C/ME does not exactly match the NVDRS case definitions 
may occur. The protocol for defining NVDRS Death Type is included in the Definition section of the 
manual. Please read it. 
o  If the facts of the case are clear and not in dispute, apply the NVDRS definitions in 
assigning Death Type. For instance, a clear unintentional shooting of one child by 
another, for example, may be categorized as an “Accident” by one medical examiner 
and a “Homicide” by another. In both these cases, the abstractor manner for the victim 
should be “Unintentional firearm – inflicted by another person.” 
o If the facts of the case are unclear or in dispute, default to the C/ME’s determination of 
manner. For example, the C/ME manner is “Homicide” and the C/ME report states, “A 
13-year-old teenager shot another 13-year-old; conflicting reports exist as to whether 
===== Page 53 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   53 | Page  
   
the shooting was intentional.” In this instance, the abstractor should use C/ME’s 
classification of manner of death (e.g., Homicide) because the C/ME intentionally 
selected “Homicide” over an “Unintentional” death explanation. 
 There may be cases whereby the ICD-10 code listed in the DC indicates a death was “Natural” or 
“Unintentional” even though the C/ME and LE report indicate the death was a “Homicide” or 
“Suicide.” This can occur for various reasons, including the ICD code could have recorded the intent 
without the manner or an investigation which led to updated findings about the death. In these 
cases, the abstractor should use the manner recorded by the C/ME and LE report instead of the DC. 
 Some states define all “Legal intervention” deaths (e.g., the victim was killed by law enforcement 
acting in the line of duty) as homicides. In contrast, NVDRS distinguishes between legal intervention 
deaths and homicides. Consequently, if after reviewing the C/ME and LE reports an abstractor can 
determine that a homicide was due to legal intervention, the abstractor assigned manner should be 
coded as ”Legal intervention.” 
 
Sometimes the manner of death is listed in a given source document for legal purposes such as seeking a 
prosecution; however,  the facts of the case should be considered in their entirety when applying 
abstractor manner. Two examples of this are as follow:  
 
 There may be cases where the manner of death is listed as “Homicide” on the C/ME or LE report, 
and/or the DC may exist solely for prosecuting drug-related offenses (e.g., drug dealers or other 
persons who assisted the victim in obtaining or using substances that led to the victim’s fatal 
overdose). In this scenario, if the case shows that the victim died of an unintentional substance 
overdose, this is considered a SUDORS case. SUDORS abstractors may assign the abstractor manner 
of death as “Unintentional” (see SUDORS case inclusion/exclusion matrix in the SUDORS Coding 
Manual for more details). 
 Likewise, a manner of death of “Homicide” may be listed on the C/ME or LE report, and/or the DC 
for an incident involving the death of an infant due to maternal substance misuse for legal 
prosecution. If ICD-10 codes P04.4, or X40-X44 are assigned, and the case facts corroborate that the 
infant’s death was an unintentional poisoning death, this is considered a SUDORS case. Please refer 
to SUDORS case inclusion/exclusion matrix in the SUDORS Coding Manual for more details. Email 
ODsurveillance@cdc.gov fo r a  copy of the manual. 
 
In conclusion, the purpose of the abstractor manner is not to second-guess the C/ME or to enable an 
abstractor to come to his or her own conclusion about the case. Rather the purpose is to characterize 
the official death investigation about the intent type of the incident in a standardized manner that is 
consistent with the C/ME report, DC, and/or LE report AND with the NVDRS case definitions. 
 
Note: Expanded guidance regarding cases where the manner of death is listed as “Homicide” on the 
C/ME or LE report, and/or the DC solely for purposes of prosecuting drug-related offenses (e.g., drug 
dealers or other persons who assisted the victim in obtaining or using substances that led to the victim’s 
fatal overdose) was added in August 2021. 
 
 
4.2 Change in Collection of Injury and Death Variables 
 
The remaining injury and death variables have traditionally been obtained from DCs. Beginning in 2013, 
these variables may be abstracted from any source when appropriate. While DCs can continue to be 
used to collect these variables, the best sources for each variable may vary across states. 
===== Page 54 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   54 | Page  
   
 
 
4.3 Injury Locations, Time, and Events 
 
4.3.1 Injury Address Variables 
4.3.1.1 State or territory where injury occurred: InjuryState 
4.3.1.2 County where injury occurred: InjuryCounty 
4.3.1.3 City where injury occurred: InjuryCity 
4.3.1.4 ZIP code where injury occurred: InjuryZip 
4.3.1.5 US Census tract where injury occurred: CensusTract 
4.3.1.6 US Census block group where injury occurred: CensusBlock 
 
Definitions: 
 InjuryState: State in which injury was inflicted  
 InjuryCounty: County (or county equivalent) in which injury was inflicted  
 InjuryCity: City/town in which injury was inflicted  
 InjuryZip: Postal ZIP code in which injury was inflicted  
 CensusTract: Census tract in which injury was inflicted 
 CensusBlock: Census block group in which injury was inflicted 
 
Response Options: 
 InjuryState  
Start typing the name of the state or INCITS 38-2009 (formerly FIPS code)†  
88  Not applicable 
99  Unknown 
 
 InjuryCounty 
Start typing the name of the county or INCITS 31-2009 (formerly FIPS code)††  
888 Not applicable 
999 Unknown 
 
 InjuryCity 
Start typing the name of the city or FIPS 55-3 or Census Code†††  
88888 Not applicable 
99999 Unknown 
 
 InjuryZip 
5-digit zip code of injury  
88888 Not applicable 
99999 Unknown 
 
 CensusTract 
4- to 6-digit census tract†††† 
9999.99 Unknown 
 
 CensusBlock  
1-digit description of block group†††† 
===== Page 55 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   55 | Page  
   
Leave blank if Unknown 
 
† State codes are unchanged between FIPS and INCITS 38:2009. 
 
†† County codes from FIPS have been carried over into INCITS 31:2009. Search for missing codes at this 
website http://www.census.gov/geo/reference/ansi.html. 
 
Codes are provided for U.S. county and “county equivalent” areas (i.e., parishes, boroughs, the District of 
Columbia, independent cities. 
 
††† Though the U.S. Geological Survey officially replaced FIPS 55-3 with INCITS 446-2008 
http://www.itl.nist.gov/fipspubs/55new/nav-top-fr.htm, N VDRS will continue using the standard FIPS 55 -
3 to facilitate data import and to maintain consistency and familiarity. 
 
†
††† Census tract and census block group information may be obtained from the following website: 
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/searchresults.xhtml?refresh=t#none. Fr om the 
toolbar on the left side of the screen (options), select “Geographies.” Then click on the "Address" tab and 
type in the street address from the DC. This will elicit Census Tract and Block Group data directly. 
 
D
iscussion: 
 If the address of injury covers more than one address, code the address where the first injury was 
inflicted. 
 If there is no explicit address for the injury incident (e.g., in a park or on the beach), record the injury 
location variables using the nearest address or cross streets. If the nearest street address or 
intersection is not available from the records, enter the injury location information for the smallest 
geography that the name (e.g., park or on the beach) falls within. For example, if a city park falls 
entirely within a zip code, enter that zip code but enter “Unknown” for smaller geographies such as 
census tract. 
 Reporting sites that geocode their data at the local level using address information (note: specific 
address information should never be entered into the web-based system) can generate the census 
block group and tract where the incident occurred from a geocoding program. In some states, the 
vital statistics registry or law enforcement department will have already geocoded the address and 
will have census tract and block group information available. 
 The county and city/town are coded using standard FIPS codes. These codes are provided in drop-
down menus in the NVDRS software. 
 
Note: Vital statistics data use two coding systems for states: FIPS and their own system. Please use the 
FIPS version here. 
 
 
4.3.2 Date and Time of Injury Variables 
4.3.2.1 Date of injury: InjuryDate 
4.3.2.2 Time of injury: InjuryTime 
 
Definitions: 
 InjuryDate: Date of injury leading to death 
 InjuryTime: Time of Injury leading to death 
 
===== Page 56 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   56 | Page  
   
Response Option: 
 InjuryDate 
Date (format: MM\DD\YYYY)  
 
You must enter “MM” and “DD” as two-digit numbers (e.g., “06” for June, not “6”). If month or day is 
missing, enter “99.” If year of injury is missing, enter “9999.” 
 
06/99/2007 for June 2007 with the day unknown  
99/99/2007 for 2007 with the month and day unknown  
99/99/9999 for the year, month, and day unknown 
 
 InjuryTime 
Code using a 24-hour format or military time, with midnight as “0000,” noon as “1200,” and 2 PM as 
“1400.” 
 
Discussion:  
Date of injury can be used to examine trends over time in violent deaths, detect epidemics, and to test 
for seasonal effects on violent death. Time of injury can be used to identify the times of day in which 
incidents may be more likely to occur. Date and time of injury can also be used to interpret toxicology 
test results. Exact date and time of injury are sometimes unknown, as in an unwitnessed suicide or 
homicide. 
 
 Do not enter the date that the victim was last seen if actual date of injury is unknown. The software 
allows for partially known date information to be entered. Enter “99” if the month or day is 
unknown and “9999” if the year is unknown: 
o For instance, if month and day of injury are unknown, but the year is known, code the 
date as 99/99/2003. If no information is known about when the incident occurred (as in 
when skeletal remains are found), it is acceptable to code date of injury as 99/99/9999. 
 Sometimes the injury will be described as occurring within a time range (e.g., between 1 PM and 2 
PM): 
o If a range of less than an hour is given (e.g., “around 9:30 AM” or “between 9:30 and 
10:30”), code that as the lowest time in the range (0930 in both cases). 
o If a range of greater than one hour is noted for the time of injury (e.g., “sometime 
between 9:30 AM and noon”), treat time as unknown. 
 
 
4.3.3 Type of location where injury occurred: InjuryLocationType 
 
Definition:  
This variable captures the type of place at which the injury occurred. 
 
Response Options: 
1 House, apartment, rooming house, including driveway, porch, yard, garage 
2 Street/road, sidewalk, alley 
3 Highway, freeway 
4 Motor vehicle, regardless of where motor vehicle is located (excluding school bus [15], and 
public transportation [21]); includes motor homes 
5 Bar, nightclub 
===== Page 57 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   57 | Page  
   
6 Service station 
7 Bank, credit union, ATM location 
8 Liquor store 
9 Other commercial establishment (e.g., grocery store, restaurants, retail outlet, laundromat), 
including parking lot1 (see footnote for additional information about commercial 
establishments) 
10  Industrial or construction areas (e.g., factory, warehouse) 
11 Office building 
12 Parking lot/public parking garage (e.g., public parking lot in a downtown area, parking lot shared 
by four or more households) 
13 Abandoned house, building, or warehouse 
14 Sports or athletic area (e.g., stadium, baseball field, gymnasium, recreation center) 
15 School bus 
16 Child care center, daycare, preschool 
17 Elementary school, middle school (i.e., K-8) including school dormitory, residential school 
18 High school, including school dormitory, residential school 
19 College/University, including dormitory, fraternity/sorority 
20 Unspecified school 
21 Public transportation or station (e.g., bus, train, plane, airport, depot, taxi) 
22 Synagogue, church, temple, mosque, shrine, tabernacle, cathedral 
23  Hospital or medical facility 
24 Supervised residential facility (e.g., shelter, halfway house, group home) 
25 Farm 
26 Jail, prison, detention facility 
27 Park, playground, public use area 
28  Natural area (e.g., field, river, beaches, woods) 
29  Hotel/motel 
30  Railroad tracks (other than on public transportation [21] or within station) 
31 Bridge 
32 Cemetery, graveyard, or other burial ground 
66 Other 
99 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Data on the type of place at which an injury occurred help to describe the injury-producing event and 
are valuable for planning and evaluating prevention programs:  
 
 If a victim was injured in various locations (e.g., the victim was stabbed on a bus and was pursued by 
the attacker off the bus and into a store and stabbed a second time), code the location at which the 
victim was first injured. 
 Designations of specific buildings (such as “House, apartment…” or “Bar, nightclub”) include both 
the building itself and the area directly outside, such as a driveway, porch, front walk, or garage. 
 Events that occur on public sidewalks should be coded as “2 – Street,” with the exception of those 
occurring on sidewalks that are the private property of an adjacent building. Those should be coded 
as the adjacent building.  
 If an incident occurs while the victim is in a motor vehicle (e.g., died in a motor vehicle at home), 
please code “4 – Motor vehicle” rather than the location of the motor vehicle. Injury “site,” injury 
“location,” and injury “scene” can all be used as synonyms. 
===== Page 58 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   58 | Page  
   
 If a victim was fatally injured falling from a bridge, code the injury location as “31 – Bridge” and not 
the location of impact. 
 If a victim was fatally injured in a nursing home or assisted living, code the injury location as “24 – 
Supervised residential facility.” 
 If a victim was fatally injured in a park, playground, ball field, or on school property, etc., code  “17 
– Elementary or middle school” or “18 – High school,” as appropriate. Endorse this injury as school-
associated violent death and complete the information on the SAVD tab and extended suspect 
information for SAVD cases on the Suspect tab. 
 If the victim was fatally injured on a K-12 school campus (code “17 – Elementary school or middle 
school; “18 – High school,” and “20 – Unspecified school”) or on school-sponsored transportation 
(e.g., school bus), endorse this injury as school-associated violent death and complete the 
information on the SAVD tab and extended suspect information for SAVD cases on the Suspect tab.  
 
Note: The category “31 – Bridge” was added in August 2013.  
 
1 “The term commercial establishment: (A) means an establishment used for commercial purposes, such 
as a bar, restaurant, private office, fitness club, oil rig, retail store, bank or other financial institution, 
supermarket, automobile or boat dealership, or any other establishment with a common business area; 
and (B) does not include a multi-unit permanent or temporary dwelling where private home viewing 
occurs, such as a hotel, dormitory, hospital, apartment, condominium, or prison.” See 
https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/17/119#d_12. 
 
 
4.3.4 Injured at work: InjuredAtWork 
 
Definition:  
Injury occurred at work or while the person was working. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, injury did not occur at work or while the victim was working 
1 Yes, injury occurred at work or while the victim was working 
8 Not applicable (e.g., child, unemployed, retiree) 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
“InjuredAtWork” includes those incidents that occur while the victim is at work or on official work 
business regardless of whether they are working at the time the injury occurs. These injuries could occur 
at the victim’s place of work or offsite during the course of work-related activities. The InjuredAtWork 
definition applies only to current jobs. 
 
The “Injured at work” item on the DC should be filled out for all injury victims with the exception of 
those 14 years and younger (unless warranted for a younger child injured at work). “Not applicable” can 
therefore be coded for victims ages 13 years and younger. 
 If the victim is injured while they are working as a volunteer fireman or police officer, the death 
should be coded as occurring at work. 
 
 
 
===== Page 59 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   59 | Page  
   
 Students injured while going to school or on school ground should not be considered injured at work 
 
 
4.3.5 Injured at victim’s home: InjuredAtVictimHome 
 
Definition: 
Injury occurred at the person’s residence. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
This variable is completed for each victim in an incident and is victim-specific (e.g., if two victims are 
killed in a home and the first victim lived there, code as “Yes.” If the second victim was visiting for 
dinner, code as “No.” The victim’s residence includes any homes they own (e.g., vacation/second 
homes). 
 
A victim who resides in an institution (e.g., jail, locked mental health facility, long-term care facility, etc.) 
should be coded “No” even though he/she resides in the institution. 
 
 
4.3.6 EMS at scene: EMSPresent 
 
Definition:  
Emergency medical services (EMS) were at the scene of the injury incident. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
EMS status describes their involvement of emergency medical services in violent injury cases. This may 
assist in planning and evaluating EMS services and in capturing costs associated with violence. Code 
"EMSPresent" to indicate the presence of medical services at the scene and not to indicate whether any 
medical services were delivered. If the victim was transported from the scene via ambulance, code this 
variable as “Yes.” 
 
 
4.3.7 Victim in custody when injured: VictimInCustody 
 
Definition:  
Person was in public custody when injury occurred. 
 
Response Options: 
===== Page 60 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   60 | Page  
   
0 Not in custody 
1 In jail or prison 
2 Under arrest but not in jail 
3 Committed to mental hospital 
4 Resident of other state institution 
5 In foster care (i.e., child in out-of-home placement) 
6 Injured prior to arrest 
8 Other (including house arrest, electronic monitoring, legal home confinement) 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
A victim is in public custody if he or she is under arrest, in foster care (i.e., out of home placement), or 
remanded by law to an institution such as a jail, prison, detention center, psychiatric ward, or hospital, 
or other institution. Custody is coded based on when the fatal injury was inflicted or when the death 
occurred. 
 
 If the injury was inflicted while the person was not in custody, but they died in custody, code as 
“Victim in custody when injured.” Code the applicable response option “1 through 8.” 
 The response “In jail or prison” also covers incarcerations in juvenile detention facilities and other 
detention facilities. 
 Abstractors must distinguish between voluntary and involuntary commitments when coding this 
variable: 
o The response, “Committed to mental hospital” includes involuntary commitments and 
involuntary observations at psychiatric wards within standard hospitals or at psychiatric 
institutions. These types of commitments should be coded with the appropriate institution 
(e.g., mental hospital would be “3”). 
o People who voluntarily commit themselves should not be coded as “In custody,” or “Not in 
custody.” 
 
 
4.3.8 Recent release from institution: RecentRelease 
 
Definition:  
Deaths that occurred within a month of the decedent being released from an institutional setting. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No evidence of recent release 
1 Jail, prison, or a detention facility 
2 Hospital 
3 Psychiatric hospital 
4 Other psychiatric institution 
5 Long-term residential health facility (e.g., nursing home) 
6 Supervised residential facility related to alcohol or substance abuse treatment (e.g., residential 
treatment facility, sober house, or group home) 
7 Supervised residential facilities not related to alcohol or substance abuse treatment (e.g., 
halfway houses or work-release homes) 
9 Other 
99 Unknown type of institution 
===== Page 61 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   61 | Page  
   
 
Discussion:  
This variable should be coded as “0” if there is no evidence of a release within the past month from an 
institutionalized setting in the data sources. In contrast, if there is evidence that the victim was released 
from an institutionalized setting in the last month, the type of institution (e.g., jail, hospital, or 
psychiatric hospital) should be coded. The decedent is considered institutionalized if they spent one or 
more nights in the institution. For instance, if a victim was released 3 days ago from an overnight 
institutional stay or a stay of over a year, the abstractor would record the type of institution from which 
they were released. If a victim was recently released from more than one facility/institution, code the 
one from which they were MOST RECENTLY released. 
 
 In contrast to the variable “Victim in custody when injured,” code both voluntary and involuntary 
commitments. The death should be coded as “0” if a decedent visits an institution for medical care 
(e.g., emergency department) and does not stay overnight or is arrested and not held overnight. 
 Deaths that occur while the decedent is living at the institution should not be coded. The type of 
institution, however, should be coded in the variable, “Victim in custody when injured.” 
 If the source document(s) indicates the victim was “just” or “recently” released and provides no 
specific timing on the release, the abstractor should consider the victim recently released and 
record the type of institution from which he or she was released. 
 If the victim was hospitalized in a psychiatric ward of a non-psychiatric hospital, code type of 
institution as “Psychiatric hospital.” 
 
When this code is endorsed, the narrative should include information about the reason for being 
institutionalized (e.g., incarcerated for aggravated assault, hospitalized for a broken hip, or released 
from court mandated substance treatment), the type of institution (e.g., hospital or prison), the length 
of time the decedent was institutionalized, and problems related to the release, if applicable (e.g., 
unable to find a job or financial difficulties after release). 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
 
4.3.9 Alcohol use suspected when injured: AlcoholUseSuspected  
 
Definition:  
This variable captures the victim’s suspected alcohol use in the hours preceding the incident. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
“AlcoholUseSuspected” can be coded as “Yes” based on witness or investigator reports (e.g., LE note 
that the victim “had been drinking heavily”), or circumstantial evidence (e.g., empty six pack scattered 
around suicide victim). This variable refers only to alcohol use and not drug use. The phrase “in the 
hours preceding the incident” can be interpreted relatively broadly: 
 
===== Page 62 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   62 | Page  
   
 If there is no evidence of alcohol use, code this variable as “No.” 
 Use the “Unknown” option only if the source does not have a narrative that could provide the 
evidence of alcohol use. If the narrative does not mention use of alcohol in any way, code “No.” 
 This code should be based solely on the scene investigation and should not refer to toxicology 
reports. This allows a comparison and integration of the scene investigation with toxicology 
information which is important. 
 
 
4.3.10 Survival time (no. of units): SurvivalTime 
4.3.11 Unit of time used in survival time: SurvivalTimeUnit 
 
Definitions: 
 SurvivalTime: Interval between injury and death 
 SurvivalTimeUnit: Unit used to report interval between injury and death 
 
Response Options:  
 SurvivalTime 
888 Not applicable 
999  Unknown 
 
 SurvivalTimeUnit 
0 Seconds  
1 Minutes 
2 Hours 
3 Days 
4 Years 
5 Months 
7 Instant 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Survival time is noted on the DC in the section called “Approximate interval between onset and death” 
to the right of the cause of death text. It is often either explicitly mentioned in the C/ME’s report or it 
can be calculated based on date and time of injury and death.  
 
 Use only the survival time listed for the violent injury. 
o Do not use the survival time listed for the consequences or complications of injury. 
o Do not add the survival times listed next to each cause of death listed on the DC. 
 If date and time of injury of death are unknown, do not calculate survival based on the interval 
between the time the person was last seen and the body was found (unless that was less than 2 
hours). 
 Indicate the length of survival interval in SurvivalTime and the units of measurement for the interval 
(e.g., minutes, hours, days) in SurvivalTimeUnits: 
o Use minutes for under 2 hours. 
o Use hours for 2 through 47 hours.  
o Use days for 48 hours and more. 
o Days should be labeled in months beyond 30 days and less than 365. 
===== Page 63 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   63 | Page  
   
o Use years for 365 or more days or for 12 or more months. 
o Round to the nearest whole number. 
 If survival time was noted as a range, use the high end of the range (e.g., 15–30 minutes, use 30). 
 If survival time is not precisely noted, indicate “999” in SurvivalTime and the applicable unit in 
SurvivalTimeUnits (e.g., “patient survived a few minutes” would be “999” in SurvivalTime and 1 in 
SurvivalTimeUnits). 
 If death is described as “instant (or instantaneous),” “immediate,” or “sudden,” indicate “0” in 
SurvivalTime and “7” in SurvivalTimeUnits. 
 
 
4.3.12 Children present and/or witnessed fatal incident: ChildPresent   
 
Definition:  
Child(ren) present during and/or witnessed the fatal incident. 
 
Response Options:  
Textbox: Enter one of the following response options; ONLY select one. 
0 No 
1 Yes 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Child(ren) present is defined as a person younger than 18 years of age who was present during the fatal 
incident. The source documents do not have to indicate if a child(ren) observed (saw or heard) the fatal 
event. This variable identifies children who were present and therefore could have been exposed to or 
witnessed acts of significant violence (i.e., fatal incidents). This exposure can occur in any type of setting, 
not only in the home of the child witness or others involved in the incident. This variable is NOT 
applicable if underage suspects were the only children present/witnessing the fatal incident. Guidance is 
as follows: 
 
 Code “Yes” if a child (person under 18 years of age, including infants [i.e., a child <1 year of age]) 
was present when the fatal injur(ies) occurred. This can include children who were nonfatally injured 
as part of the incident, and other children who were present and uninjured. This can include 
children who are able to “hear” or “witness” the fatal incident via the phone or technology (e.g., 
FaceTime). Code “Yes” if the source documents indicate a child (person under 18 years of age) was 
asleep or in another room in the house when the fatal injur(ies) occurred. 
 Code “Yes” if the child(ren) found the decedent after the fatal injuries occurred, were there when 
others found the decedent fatally injured, or if the child(ren) were at the scene shortly after the 
decedent was found (e.g., while police were investigating or EMS had arrived).   
 Code “Yes” if a child found the body of the decedent(s) in a public place, even if they did not know 
the decedent(s). They likely did not witness the fatal incident in this scenario, but were exposed to 
its aftermath.  
 Code “No” if the children present at the time of the fatal incident were all fatally injured in the 
incident. This variable reflects living “witnesses” only. 
 Code “No” if a person(s) 18 years of age or older was present and observed the fatal incident. 
 Code “No” if the child present was a prenatal (i.e., fetus) “witness.”  
===== Page 64 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   64 | Page  
   
 Code “No” if it is clear in the source documents that no child(ren) witnessed and/or were present 
during the fatal incident. For example, code “No” if only another adult(s) witnessed and/or was 
present during the fatal incident.  
 Code “No” if the source documents indicate the victim was alone when the fatal incident occurred. 
 Code “Unknown” only if the source does not include a narrative that could provide the evidence 
that child(ren) witnessed and/or were present, or if based on the limited information provided in 
the source documents, it is unknown if a child was present and/or witnessed the fatal event.  
Note: This variable was added in November 2020. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners. 
 
 
4.4 Hospital Codes 
 
4.4.1 Victim seen in emergency department: EmergencyDepartment 
 
Definition:  
Victim was seen in an emergency department following the fatal incident. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No 
1  Yes 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
 Code “Yes” for victims who arrived at the emergency department regardless of whether they were 
dead or alive on arrival and regardless of whether or not they received treatment.  
 Also code: Code “Yes” if the victim was admitted to inpatient care. Most violent injury patients will 
have been seen in the emergency department if they were later admitted to inpatient care. 
 
 
4.4.2 Victim admitted to inpatient care: HospitalAdmit 
 
Definition: 
Victim was admitted to the hospital for inpatient care following the fatal incident. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Collected, Not Available, Unknown  
1  Yes 
 
Discussion: 
 Victims who were admitted to inpatient care should be coded as “Yes.”  
 Code as “No” if a victim was admitted for an “observation only” overnight stay and not admitted as 
an inpatient. 
 If the victim was noted as having been in the operating room, code as “Yes” even if they died in the 
operating room. 
===== Page 65 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   65 | Page  
   
 Code as “Yes” if DeathPlace for victim is “1 – Hospital Inpatient.”  
 
 
4.4.3 ICD-9-CM Hospital Code Variables 
4.4.3.1 First external cause of injury ICD9 code by hospital: ExternalCause1ICD9 
4.4.3.2 Second external cause of injury ICD9 code by hospital: ExternalCause2ICD9 
 
Definition:  
E-codes are specialized ICD-9-CM codes used to identify the cause of the fatal injury and are identified 
by an “E” before the number. 
 
Response Options: 
Hospitals provide codes in ICD format: E###. # 
000.7  Not collected by reporting site 
000.8 Not applicable 
000.9 Unknown or missing 
 
Discussion:  
These variables should be coded as they appear in the hospital discharge data, or, if unavailable, in the 
emergency department records. Note the following guidance: 
 
 E-codes are assigned by the medical records department using the International Classification of 
Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM), to describe the external cause of injury. 
Thus, the codes supply information about whether a hospital visit involved suicidal behavior or 
being assaulted and mechanism of injury (e.g., poison or gun). 
 Type in the “E” when entering the code unless the “Not collected by reporting site,” “Not 
applicable,” or “Unknown or missing” codes are being used. 
 DO NOT ENTER other ICD-9-CM codes that are not e-codes (i.e., these codes will not have an “E” as 
the first digit).  
 Do not use trailing zeroes after the decimal point (unless a true zero is part of the actual code). 
 These codes will eventually be phased out and replaced by the ICD-10-CM codes. 
 
 
4.4.4 ICD-10-CM Hospital Code Variables 
4.4.4.1 First external cause of injury ICD10 code by hospital: ExternalCause1ICD10 
4.4.4.2 Second external cause of injury ICD10 code by hospital: ExternalCause2ICD10 
 
Definition:  
U.S. hospitals will eventually be moving from the ICD-9-CM codes to the ICD-10-CM codes. These 
variables allow the user to enter such codes as hospitals transition to them. 
 
Response Options:  
Hospitals provide codes in ICD format: ###. # 
000.7 Not collected by reporting site 
000.8 Not applicable 
000.9 Unknown or missing 
 
Discussion:  
===== Page 66 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   66 | Page  
   
These variables should be coded as they appear in the hospital discharge data, or, if unavailable, in the 
emergency department records. Do not use trailing zeroes after the decimal point (unless a true zero is 
part of the actual code). These codes will remain inactive until hospitals start to use them. 
 
 
4.5 Wounds and Death Certificate 
 
 
4.5.1 Underlying Cause of Death Variables 
4.5.1.1 Underlying cause of death ICD-10 code: UnderlyingCauseCode 
4.5.1.2 Underlying cause of death ICD-10 code 4th digit: UnderlyingCauseCode4thDigit 
4.5.1.3 Underlying cause of death ICD-10 code 5th digit: UnderlyingCauseCode5thDigit 
 
Definition: 
 UnderlyingCauseCode  
Underlying cause-of-death code (ICD-10)  
4th_ICD: 4th character 
5th_ICD: 5th character 
 
Response Options: 
 UnderlyingCauseCode 
ICD-10 Format: L##. ## (the first character must be a letter, followed by at least two and up to 
four digits) 
Use “99999 - L99.99” for missing values. 
 
 UnderlyingCauseCode4thDigit  
ICD-10 coding of 4th character (type of place of occurrence) — applies only to codes in the W32 
to Y34 range, except Y06 and Y07. 
0 Home 
1 Residential institution 
2 School, institution, public administrative area (e.g., courthouse, hospital, daycare 
center) 
3 Sports and athletic area 
4 Street and highway 
5 Trade and service area 
6 Industrial and construction (e.g., factory, shipyard) 
7 Farm 
8 Other 
9 Unspecified 
 
 UnderlyingCauseCode5thDigit 
ICD-10 coding of 5th character (type of activity when injured) — applies only to codes in the 
W32 to Y34 range. 
0 While engaged in sports activity 
1 While engaged in leisure activity 
2 While working for income 
3 While engaged in other types of work (e.g., chores, school) 
4 While resting, sleeping, eating, or engaging in other vital activities 
===== Page 67 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   67 | Page  
   
5 While engaged in other specified activities 
6 While engaged in unspecified activities 
9 Unspecified 
 
Discussion:  
The underlying cause of death assigned on the DC is the basis for the nation’s official count of deaths 
due to homicide, suicide, and other causes. A comparison of this variable with the C/ME variable 
“Manner” and the abstractor variable “Type of Death,” will indicate the degree to which data sources 
vary in classifying deaths. 
 
Cause of death is coded using the system established by the World Health Organization’s ICD, the most 
recent version of which is ICD-10. The variable should be coded exactly as it appears in the underlying 
cause of death field in the DC data and should never be determined by the abstractor. Use the decimal 
point following the second digit. Do not use trailing zeroes after the decimal point (unless a true zero is 
part of the actual code). Note the following guidance: 
 
 If DC data are not available at the time that the reporting site is gathering data on the case, code as 
“Unknown.” The ICD-10 codes are added after the preliminary DC is created; consequently these 
data may not be available until months after the death or when you first receive the DC. 
 The fourth ICD-10 digit in the underlying cause of death code is used with some external cause code 
categories to identify the place of occurrence of the external cause where relevant. Please leave 
blank if unavailable. 
 The fifth ICD-10 digit is provided for optional use in a supplementary character position with some 
categories to indicate the activity of the injured person at the time the event occurred. This sub-
classification should not be confused with, or be used instead of, the recommended fourth-
character subdivisions provided to indicate the place of occurrence. Please leave blank if 
unavailable. 
 
 
4.5.2 Cause of Death Variables 
 
 
4.5.2.1  Immediate cause of death text: DeathCause1  
4.5.2.2 Cause leading to immediate cause of death text: DeathCause2 
4.5.2.3 Next antecedent cause of death text: DeathCause3 
4.5.2.4 Underlying cause of death text: DeathCause4 
4.5.2.5 Other significant conditions contributing to death text: OtherCondition 
4.5.2.6 How injury occurred text: HowInjuryOccurred 
 
Definitions:± 
 Immediate cause of death (text from DC): The final disease, injury, or complication directly causing 
death. 
 Cause leading to the immediate cause of death (text from DC): Next sequential cause of death, if 
any leading to the immediate cause of death.  
 Next antecedent cause of death (text from DC): Next sequential cause of death, if any, leading to the 
immediate cause of death.  
 Underlying cause of death (text from DC): The disease or injury that initiated the chain of morbid 
events that led directly and inevitably to death. 
===== Page 68 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   68 | Page  
   
 Other significant conditions contributing to death (text from DC): Conditions contributing to death 
are pre-existing or coexisting diseases, conditions, or injuries that may have contributed to the 
death but did not directly result in the underlying cause of death.  
 How injury occurred (text from DC): A brief, specific, and clear description of how the injury 
occurred. It may include circumstances surrounding the injury, the cause of injury, and in the case of 
firearm injuries, the type of firearm.   
 
Response Option:  
Text as it appears on DC 
 
Discussion:  
The text that the death certifier supplies on the DC regarding the causes of death can be used to identify 
reportable cases in a timely manner. Note the following guidance: 
 
 Enter the text exactly as it appears on the DC. 
 The letters in the variable names correspond to the lettered lines appearing on the DC. 
 Some DCs will not have an entry on all four cause of death lines or on the lines for “other significant 
conditions contributing to death” or “how injury occurred.” In this case, the abstractor should only 
complete the lines with available data and leave the others blank. 
 While coded data that captures the underlying cause of death using ICD-10 codes is an efficient 
means of identifying confirmed cases, they will not be available in some states for many months. 
Consequently, this information may help in identifying cases. 
 
± Defined by CDC’s National Center for Health Statistics, Instructions for Completing the Cause-of-Death 
Section of the Death Certificate http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/blue_form.pdf. Causes of death are 
typically listed top to bottom in the order seen here, with immediate cause of death listed first. See also 
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/misc/hb_cod.pdf. 
 
 
4.5.3 Place of Death: DeathPlace 
  
 
Definition:  
Victim’s place of death 
 
Response Options: 
1 Hospital inpatient 
2 ED/outpatient  
3  Dead on arrival  
4  Hospice facility 
5 Nursing home, long-term care facility 
6 Decedent’s home 
7  Other (specify) 
9  Undetermined 
 
Discussion:  
The code list is the same as that used on the current standard DC in the U.S. The place of death may be 
useful for emergency response planning and to assist in evaluating hospital or EMS services. The older 
===== Page 69 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   69 | Page  
   
DC standard certificate uses slightly different codes (e.g., no separate code exists for “Hospice,” and 
“Residence” is used rather than “Decedent’s home.”) 
 
 S ome deaths will be coded on the DC as “Other” for place of death. This will usually refer to “scene” 
deaths (e.g., a homicide victim who dies on the street). If “Other” is coded on the DC, enter the 
place of death in the free text field if the place is specified on the DC. If it is not, leave the text field 
blank. In the free text field, do not enter an address or proper name that could identify the 
location. Only enter a general description of the place (e.g., bridge, road, forest, field, etc.) 
 Do not enter the information supplied in the death certificate’s item, “Place of injury,” in this field as 
this may be a different location than the place where the victim actually died and is captured in 
another variable. 
 “Body location” can be used as place of death if there is no indication that the person died 
elsewhere. 
 If your state uses the older code list, “residence” should be coded as “Decedent’s home” (although 
this may sometimes be incorrect). 
 
 
4.5.4 Place of death if other: DeathPlaceText 
 
Definition:  
Text if place of death is “Other” 
 
Response Option:  
Text 
 
Discussion:  
Some deaths will be coded on the DC as “Other” for place of death. This will usually refer to “scene” 
deaths (e.g., a homicide victim who dies on the street). If “Other” is coded on the DC, enter the place of 
death in the free text field if it is specified on the DC. If it is not, leave the text field blank. In the free 
text field, do not enter an address or proper name that could identify the location. Only enter a 
general description of the place (e.g., bridge, road, forest, field, etc.). 
 
 
4.5.5 Date pronounced dead: DeathPronouncedDate 
 
Definition:  
Date on which the victim was found or pronounced dead 
 
Response Options:  
Date (format: MM/DD/YYYY) 
Use “99” if the day or month is unknown and “9999” if the year is unknown:  
 
06/99/2007 for June 2007 with the day unknown 
99/99/2007 for 2007 with the month and day unknown  
99/99/9999 for the year, month, and day unknown 
 
Discussion:  
This variable is useful when a person is found dead and the actual date of death is unclear. It provides a 
===== Page 70 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   70 | Page  
   
date that the death must have preceded. This field is found on the standard DC as Item 24, “Date 
pronounced dead.” It should differ from the actual date of death ONLY when the death was not 
observed and may have occurred prior to the date the body was found. This date should be known in 
every case, whereas the day, month, or even year of actual death may be unknown. 
 
 If your state does not report a date pronounced, please notify CDC and leave the field blank. 
 
 
4.5.6 Date of death: DeathDate 
 
Definition:  
Date of victim’s death 
 
Response Options: 
Date (format: MM/DD/YYYY) 
Use “99” if the day or month is unknown: 
 
06/99/2007 for June 2007 with the day unknown 
99/99/2007 for 2007 with the month and day unknown 
 
Note: The system will not accept an unknown year of death. Year of death governs which year an 
incident should be entered in (See Discussion). 
 
Discussion:  
Date of death determines the data year in which the victim will be counted in conjunction with date and 
time of the incident, and with survival time. When recording the information from the DC, enter the 
date of death exactly as it appears in the “Date of Death” field, even if the word “found” or 
“pronounced” precedes it on the hard copy. Note the following guidance: 
 
 If the date on the C/ME report is referred to as an actual date of death, record it. 
 If the date is referred to as the date on which the body was found or the death was pronounced, 
and it is unknown on which date the death actually occurred, enter only that portion of the date 
that is known. 
 
The process for placing violent deaths in the appropriate year is described below. 
 
 Y ear of a violent death. The year of death is the calendar year in which the victim died. So, for 
example, if a victim was injured at the end of December 2002, but died in early January 2003, the 
death would be reported in the 2003 data year. Although the NVDRS software allows for specific 
month or date of death to be entered as “Unknown,” the year of death must be filled in. In the case 
of a true unknown year of death (as in skeletal remains with unknown year of death, or an 
unattended death that may have occurred either shortly before or shortly after January 1), enter the 
year in which the body was found as the year of death. 
 Year of a violent death for multiple death incidents.  The year of a violent death incident is the first 
year in which any of the victims in the incident died. For example, if two people are shot on 
December 21, 2006 and one dies on December 22, 2006 and the second dies on January 4, 2007, the 
year of the incident would be 2006. The only exception to this rule occurs when any of the deaths 
occurred in a year prior to 2003, the first year of NVDRS. In that case, place the incident in the first 
===== Page 71 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   71 | Page  
   
year of death after 2002. In other words, incidents with deaths in 2002 and 2003 should be placed in 
2003. Incidents with deaths in 2002 and 2004 should be placed in 2004. Incidents with deaths in 
2003 and 2004 should be placed in 2003. 
 
 
4.5.7 State or territory of death: DeathState 
 
Definition:  
State in which the death occurred. 
 
Response Option:  
Start typing the state or territory to activate auto-complete. 
 
Discussion:  
DeathState identifies the state in which the DC was filed. This variable will be used to facilitate data 
sharing across states when state of injury and state of death differ. 
 
State of death will usually be the same as state of injury; however, on occasion the two will differ. For 
instance, a victim who is injured in one state may be transported to another state for emergency 
medical care. Note the following guidance: 
 
 If the state of death is unknown, enter the state in which the person was pronounced dead (i.e., the 
state that issued the DC). 
 If the person was pronounced dead in a U.S. territory, enter the FIPS code for that territory. 
 If the person was not pronounced dead in any U.S. state or territory, enter 88, for “Not applicable.” 
This can still be an NVDRS case if the victim was fatally injured in a participating NVDRS state. 
 A death on an American Indian reservation should be coded as the state in which it is located or, if 
the reservation spans multiple states, be based on state borders. 
 
 
4.5.8 Autopsy performed: AutopsyPerformed  
 
Definition:  
Autopsy performed on the person 
 
Response Options: 
0 Not autopsied 
1 Autopsied (full or partial) 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Autopsies are not performed on every case that comes to the attention of a C/ME, but decedents who 
have been autopsied are likely to have more reliable cause of death codes and pregnancy findings. A 
yes/no item appears on the DC to indicate if an autopsy was performed. However, the same criteria to 
determine whether an autopsy was performed may not uniformly be applied across jurisdictions. 
Therefore, NVDRS attempts to achieve some standardization of this variable through the definitions 
below.  
 
===== Page 72 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   72 | Page  
   
External examination consists of measuring and recording body length and weight and assessing 
external aspects of the body before internal examination. It documents identifying features, signs of or 
absence of disease and trauma, and of death. External examination (including post-mortem imaging) 
does not qualify as an autopsy. Toxicology testing alone (i.e., without an internal examination) also does 
not qualify as an autopsy. 
 
An autopsy is defined as the examination and dissection (i.e., internal examination) of a dead body by a 
physician for the purpose of determining the cause, mechanism, or manner of death, or the seat of 
disease, confirming the clinical diagnosis, obtaining specimens for specialized testing, retrieving physical 
evidence, identifying the deceased or educating medical professionals and students.* A full autopsy 
typically includes the removal and examination of all internal organs, including the organs of the central 
nervous system, pelvis, and abdomen.** 
 
When the main concern is limited specifically to one organ or tissue disease process, the C/ME may 
focus their examination on that specific tissue. Partial autopsy consists of internal examination of only 
those body cavities where the C/ME expects some findings to explain the cause of death.***  
 
*National Association of Medical Examiners (NAME). Forensic autopsy performance standards. 2015.  
**Zarbo RJ, Baker PB, Howanitz PJ. Quality assurance of autopsy permit form information, timeliness of 
performance, and issuance of preliminary report: a college of American pathologists q-probes study of 
5434 autopsies from 452 institutions. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1996;120:346–52. 
***Chattopadhyay S. Partial autopsy—a second thought. Int J Forensic Sci Pathol 2014;2(2):1. 
 
 
4.5.9 Wound Count Variables  
4.5.9.1  Number of penetrating wounds: NumberWounds 
4.5.9.2  Number of bullets: NumberBullets 
 
Definitions: 
 NumberWounds: Number of wounds to the victim 
 NumberBullets: Number of bullets that hit the victim 
 
Response Options:  
Number of wounds/bullets up to 75 
75 75 or more 
76 Multiple, unspecified 
88 Not applicable (no firearm or sharp instrument wounds) 
99 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
These data elements only apply to firearm injuries and sharp instrument wounds (including shrapnel 
from explosions). Only the wounds from the weapon(s) that caused the death should be entered. For 
victims fatally injured by both a gun and a knife, and it is unclear which one inflicted the fatal injury, 
count all wounds from both weapon types and code all wound locations. Note the following guidance: 
 
 For “NumberWounds,” code the total number of penetrating wounds on the victim. Count both 
entry and exit wounds: 
o If the victim was reported as having multiple wounds, but no number is provided, please use 
===== Page 73 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   73 | Page  
   
the code “76 – Multiple, unspecified.” 
o If the record refers only to a “wound” in the singular, the number of wounds is one. If it 
refers only to “wounds,” the number of wounds is “Multiple, unspecified.” 
 For “NumberBullets” (for gunshot wound victims only), code the total number of bullets that hit the 
victim: 
o When determining the number of wounds and bullets for shotgun injuries, treat each 
shotgun blast as one injury and each shotgun shell as one bullet. 
o If the victim was reported as having multiple bullet wounds, but no number is provided, 
please use the code “76 – Multiple, unspecified.” 
 
 
4.5.10 Wound Location Variables 
4.5.10.1 Wound to the head: WoundToHead 
4.5.10.2 Wound to the face: WoundToFace 
4.5.10.3 Wound to the neck: WoundToNeck 
4.5.10.4 Wound to an upper extremity: WoundToUpperExtremity 
4.5.10.5 Wound to the spine: WoundToSpine 
4.5.10.6 Wound to the thorax: WoundToThorax 
4.5.10.7 Wound to the abdomen: WoundToAbdomen 
4.5.10.8 Wound to a lower extremity: WoundToLowerExtremity 
 
Definitions: 
 WoundToHead: Presence of wound to the head 
 WoundToFace: Presence of wound to the face (e.g., mouth, nose, eyes, ears, and chin/under chin 
[between chin and neck])  
 WoundToNeck: Presence of wound to the neck 
 WoundToUpperExtremity: Presence of wound in the upper extremities (shoulders, arms, hands) 
WoundToSpine: Presence of wound to the spine 
 WoundToThorax: Presence of wound to the thorax (between the neck and the diaphragm, partially 
encased by the ribs and containing the heart and lungs; the chest) or upper back 
 WoundToAbdomen: Presence of wound to the abdomen (lies between the thorax and includes the 
pelvis) and encloses the stomach, intestines, liver, spleen, pancreas, pelvic contents (including 
genital area), or lower back 
 WoundToLowerExtremity: Presence of wound to the lower extremities (feet, hips, legs) 
 
Response Options: 
0 Absent (not wounded) 
1 Present (wounded) 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
These codes help describe the relationship between incident circumstance and wound location(s) on the 
victim’s body. 
 
These data elements only apply to firearm injuries and sharp instrument wounds (including shrapnel 
from explosions). Note the following guidance: 
 
===== Page 74 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   74 | Page  
   
 Code the wound locations of penetrating wounds only; do not code the locations of superficial 
grazing wounds or blunt trauma wounds. 
 Code only the location of the external entrance or exit wound. 
 For victims fatally injured by both a gun and a knife, and it is unclear which one inflicted the fatal 
injury, count all wounds from both weapon types and code all wound locations. 
 If the record only refers to a “wound” in the singular, the number of wounds is one. If it refers only 
to “wounds,” the number of wounds is “Multiple, unspecified.” 
 If a wound is described as being on the “back,” with no reference to “upper” or “lower” back, code 
as “thorax.” 
 
WOUND LOCATION DIAGRAM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
===== Page 75 =====
 
Section 4. Injury and Death Variables   75 | Page  
   
4.5.11 Multiple Condition Codes 1-10: MultipleConditionCode01ICD10- 
MultipleConditionCode10ICD10 
 
Definition:  
These variables describe the nature of the injury and other conditions leading to death. Up to 10 
condition codes can be entered. 
 
Response Options: 
Format:  L##. ## (the first character must be a letter, followed by at least two and up to four 
digits)  
L88.88 Not applicable+ 
L99.99  Unknown or missing+ 
 
+Not an ICD-10 code but used by NVDRS to identify missing cases. 
 
Discussion:  
The “nature of injury” (or “multiple condition”) codes assigned to the DC specify the anatomic location 
and nature of the injuries. This information may assist in evaluating emergency medical response. The 
registry of vital records assigns multiple condition codes to DC records to indicate the nature of injuries 
and diseases leading to death. Codes are based on ICD-10 edition coding protocols; thus, 
“MultiCondxxICD10” elements should be entered into NVDRS exactly as they are coded in the multiple 
cause of death fields in DC data. These codes can include both diagnosis codes (nature of injury and 
disease) and external cause of injury codes. Codes should be entered with decimal points in the fourth 
position. No more than 10 codes can be entered. 
===== Page 76 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  76 | Page  
   
SECTION 5. CIRCUMSTANCE VARIABLES  
 
5.1 General Guidance on Coding NVDRS Circumstances 
NVDRS collects information about the specific circumstances that are reported or perceived in the 
investigative reports (i.e., C/ME or LE report and DC) as being related to the violent death. For the vast 
majority of circumstances, inclusion in the investigation reports and/or occurring before or right after 
the fatal injury (e.g., preceding or impending events) is sufficient to code a circumstance. These 
circumstances will help to identify, develop, and evaluate preventive interventions. General guidance on 
coding circumstances is provided below. 
 
 
5.1.1 Circumstances Describe the Victim 
Circumstance data elements in NVDRS are part of the victim’s record and apply to victims in an incident. 
This is important to keep in mind when coding homicide incidents—circumstances must be interpreted 
as they apply to the victim, not to the suspect. For example, if a person is fired from a job and later kills 
the manager who fired him, this would not lead to endorsing the “Job problem” circumstance: the 
victim in this case is the manager who fired him. 
 
Also, in incidents with multiple victims, please make sure to check the circumstances specific to that 
victim. For instance, one victim of an incident may have been killed as part of a robbery while the 
second victim was killed by law enforcement responding. The circumstances for these two victims 
should be different. 
 
 
5.1.2 Coding Mental Health, Alcohol and Substance Abuse Problems 
Abstractors should code circumstances related to mental health, alcohol or substance abuse problems, 
or other addictions as “Yes” if any of these problems are indicated in investigation reports. A direct link 
to the death is not required. These circumstances are coded for all victims. 
 
 
5.1.3 Coding Circumstances Not Related to Mental Health, Alcohol, and Substance Abuse 
Problems 
For other circumstances, the circumstance should be endorsed if there is an indication that it was 
perceived by investigators as related to the death based on interviews or the investigation (e.g., 
mentioned in suicide note, family reports the victim was upset about financial problems, or argument 
was perceived by witnesses to escalate into the homicide). Because LE and C/ME reports are 
investigative reports, inclusion in the report and/or the circumstance closely preceding or occurring right 
after the fatal incident (e.g., preceding or impending events) is sufficient to code the circumstance as 
“Yes.” For instance, a victim going bankrupt a few days before a suicide, a homicide occurring during a 
robbery, or a suicide occurring the day before a court appearance should be coded (i.e., inclusion in the 
investigative report does indicate its perceived involvement). 
===== Page 77 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  77 | Page  
   
 
Two exceptions to this rule exist. Health problems and criminal history are sometimes listed as a routine 
part of the investigation. Criminal legal or health problems should not be endorsed if they are simply 
listed as part of the routine investigation (e.g., victim had diabetes and heart disease or a criminal 
history of burglary) and no indication they were related to the death is found. 
 
5.1.4 Changing Some Circumstances to Suicide or Homicide Only Circumstances 
Due to low use and/or lack of clarity in coding, several circumstances currently coded for all deaths will 
now only be coded for homicide or suicides. Please review the guidance on each variable. 
 
 
5.1.5 New Format for Crisis Variables 
Prior to August 2013, abstractors were asked to determine whether the event was related to a crisis by 
checking a crisis variable and then indicating in the narrative which circumstances were related to it. To 
better identify this, the crisis option is now available as a checkbox for several circumstances for which it 
is appropriate. The root circumstance must first be endorsed based on established criteria (see above 
for guidance) for each of these. Once the root circumstance is endorsed, a crisis related to that 
circumstance based upon the timing of it in relation to the incident may also be considered. For 
instance, a victim may have an alcohol problem reported by their family. This would lead to then 
checking the “alcohol problem” circumstance if the victim had a crisis related to their alcohol problem 
within 2 weeks of the death (e.g., a relapse a week before the death or losing their job due to the 
alcohol problem the day before the death) or an impending crisis within 2 weeks of death (e.g., was to 
be disciplined the day after the suicide for drinking on the job). 
 
5.1.6 Coding the Crisis Variables 
The crisis variable is important to identify deaths that may involve an element of impulsivity and be 
related to a crisis. Consistent with previous coding manual versions, a “Crisis” is a current/acute event 
(within 2 weeks of death) that is indicated in one of the source reports to have contributed to the death. 
Inclusion in the source document and indication that the event occurred within 2 weeks of the death is 
sufficient to code a circumstance as a crisis. Direct language that the event caused or contributed to the 
death is not required to code “Yes.” 
 
The following guidance will assist in identifying crises: 
 
 A crisis can precede the death (e.g., had a bad argument the day before the incident, divorce papers 
served that day, or victim laid off the week before) or be an impending event (e.g., house was to be 
foreclosed on the day after the incident or court date for a criminal offense 3 days after the suicide).  
 Crisis should be interpreted from the eyes of the victim. This is particularly relevant for young 
victims whose crises, such as a bad grade or a dispute with parents over a curfew, may appear to 
others as relatively minor. 
 An actual time period for the crisis may not be mentioned in the records, so use language as a clue. 
o “Decedent was experiencing financial difficulties after losing his job” would not trigger 
coding a recent crisis because the timeframe is unclear. 
===== Page 78 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  78 | Page  
   
o “Decedent had just received a pink slip at work” would be coded because the word “just” 
indicates that the crisis occurred right before the death, or within two weeks. 
 Ongoing/chronic problems should not be coded as crises unless there was an acute change in the 
status (change in prognosis of chronic illness). Coding a case as being related to a crisis does not 
mean that there aren’t also chronic conditions that have contributed to the victim’s death. 
 A homicide followed by a suicide should always be coded as “Yes” for “Crisis” for the suicide victim 
unless the two deaths were both clearly consensual and planned in advance (i.e., a double suicide). 
 Crisis Not Related to an Existing Circumstance: If a crisis is related to a death AND not captured by 
any of the circumstances, the abstractor should code: “Crisis in past two weeks or upcoming two 
weeks (legacy data element)” and provide comments in the “other circumstance” field. Please note 
that in the analytic data file, the legacy data element “CrisisRecent” has been archived as of the 
2016 dataset in order to avoid confusion. All cases endorsed as having a recent crisis in the legacy 
data, as well as current cases with a specific or “other” crisis as described above are captured 
under the calculated variable “AnyCrisis_c” in the analytic data file. 
 
Examples of events that should and should not be coded as crises are provided below: 
 
 Code “Yes” for Crisis 
o The victim’s husband announced the day of her suicide that he was divorcing her. 
o A 15-year-old adolescent had a heated argument with his mother, stormed out of the room, 
and shot himself. 
o The decedent killed his ex-wife and then himself. 
o Five days prior to the suicide, the victim was questioned about his suspected sexual abuse of 
his two nephews by police. 
o The victim was about to be returned to prison in a few days before the suicide. 
o After a recent break-up, the decedent went to his girlfriend’s house to attempt 
reconciliation. She refused, and he shot himself in her driveway (the crisis, in this case, 
would be the refused reconciliation, even if the break-up was not within the past two 
weeks). 
o An elderly man fell in the bathtub breaking his hip. The next day, his doctor told him that he 
would need to go to a nursing home. A week later, he dies by suicide. 
o Police were pursuing a suspect. As they drew near, the man turned the gun on himself and 
fired. Victim had just received a lay-off notice at work. 
o The victim was laid off from work. The next day, the victim went back to his office and shot 
at his coworkers wounding two of them, before being fatally shot by police. 
o The decedent was despondent over recent job loss. 
 
 Code “No” for Crisis 
o A 45-year-old man was unemployed and experiencing financial difficulties. (Had this 
statement been added to his case, “was to be evicted from his apartment the following 
weekend” the case would qualify as a “Yes”). The victim had emphysema and the condition 
was worsening. 
o The victim was in the process of divorcing her husband.  
 
Unless otherwise noted, the response options for crisis variables are: 
 
Response Options: 
0  No, Not Available, Unknown  
===== Page 79 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  79 | Page  
   
1 Yes 
 
 
5.1.7 Export Format of Circumstances 
When the circumstance variables are exported into .csv, the variable label for each circumstance will be 
preceded by its data source (i.e., “LE_” for law enforcement and “C/ME_” for coroner/medical 
examiner). For instance, the circumstance job problem from LE will be exported as “LE_jobproblem” and 
from C/ME as “C/ME_jobproblem.” 
 
 
5.1.8 Handling Discrepancies Across Data Sources 
The circumstances between the C/ME and LE may not exactly match. This is expected because the 
different investigations may reveal different circumstances. For this reason, the circumstances from the 
different sources should be coded independently. In a rare instance, one investigation may disprove the 
circumstances listed from another data source. For instance, a legal investigation may find a suspect 
who killed a spouse originally misled authorities by blaming the death on a robbery. However, the C/ME 
report lists robbery as the precipitating circumstance because it was collected right after the death. In 
this rare instance where a circumstance is specifically listed and proved as false in a later report, please 
do not check the circumstance that was proved false. Instead, please note in narrative that the 
circumstance was proved false (e.g., C/ME: Robbery was reported as precipitating circumstance, but 
later LE investigation revealed this was a false report). 
 
 
5.2 Circumstances Known Variables 
 
 
5.2.1 Circumstances from C/ME: CME_CircumstancesKnown 
5.2.2 Circumstances from LE: LE_CircumstancesKnown 
 
Definitions: 
 CME_CircumstancesKnown: Indicates if any information is available in the C/ME report about the 
circumstances, including other circumstances, associated with this violent death. 
 LE_CircumstancesKnown: Indicates if any information is available in the LE report about the 
circumstances, including other circumstance, associated with this violent death. For victims 17 years 
of age or younger, states should enter in circumstances obtained from CFR reports in the LE section. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
This variable operates as a stem question. Checking the circumstances known box causes the individual 
circumstances to appear on the screen. Un-checking the circumstances known box causes the 
circumstances to disappear and implies that the circumstances preceding the incident are not known. 
 
Note: If the abstractor has entered circumstances and un-checks circumstances known box, the program 
===== Page 80 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  80 | Page  
   
will delete the entered circumstances when the abstractor presses save. 
 
 
5.3 Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and Other Addictions 
 
 
5.3.1 Current diagnosed mental health problem: CME/LE_MentalHealthProblem 
 
Definition:  
Current mental health problem 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
Code a victim as “Yes” for “C/ME/LE_MentalHealthProblem” if he or she has been identified as currently 
having a mental health problem. There does not need to be any indication that the mental health 
condition directly contributed to the death. 
 
 Mental health problems include those disorders and syndromes listed in the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) with the exception of alcohol and other 
substance dependence (as these are captured in separate variables). 
 Examples of disorders qualifying as mental health problems include diagnoses such as major 
depression, schizophrenia, and generalized anxiety disorder, as well as neurodevelopmental 
disorders (such as intellectual disability, autism, attention-deficit /hyperactivity disorder), eating 
disorders, personality disorders, and organic mental disorders (such as Alzheimer’s and other 
dementias). 
 Also indicate “Yes” if it is mentioned in the source document that the victim was being treated for a 
mental health problem, even if the nature of the problem is unclear (e.g., “was being treated for 
various psychiatric problems”). 
 It is acceptable to endorse this variable on the basis of past treatment of a mental health problem, 
unless it is specifically noted that the past problem has been resolved. However, do not code this 
circumstance based only on a positive toxicology test for psychiatric medications (such as 
antidepressants). There must also be some indication that the victim was actually being treated for a 
mental health condition, such as a current prescription, the report of a family member, etc. 
  
Also code: At least one Mental Health Diagnosis variable should also be coded if this is coded. If the type 
of mental health diagnosis is unknown, please code “Type of first mental illness diagnosed” as “99 –
Unknown.”  
 
Manner of Death: All manners. 
  
 
5.3.2 Current diagnosed mental health problem was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisMentalHealth 
 
Examples of possible mental health crises include, but are not limited to: 1) receives diagnosis within 
two weeks of a suicide; 2) condition abruptly changes or worsens within two weeks of the violence (such 
===== Page 81 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  81 | Page  
   
as, victim experiencing a psychotic episode or victim fails to comply with medication and 
symptomatology increases); and 3) changes in care within two weeks of care (such as victim was 
hospitalized, victim’s therapist relocates). 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
Manner of Death: All manners. 
 
 
5.3.3 Mental Health Diagnosis Variables 
5.3.3.1. Mental health diagnosis 1: CME/LE_MentalHealthDiagnosis1 
5.3.3.2. Mental health diagnosis 2: CME/LE_MentalHealthDiagnosis2 
5.3.3.3. Other mental health diagnosis: CME/LE_MentalHealthDiagnosisOther 
 
Definitions: 
 CME/LE_MentalHealthDiagnosis1/2: Type of mental illness diagnosis 
 CME/LE_MentalHealthDiagnosisOther: Other type of mental illness 
 
Response Options: 
 CME/LE_MentalHealthDiagnosis1/2  
1 Depression/dysthymia 
2 Bipolar disorder 
3 Schizophrenia 
4 Anxiety disorder 
5 Post-traumatic stress disorder 
6 Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) 
7 Eating disorder 
8 Obsessive- compulsive disorder 
9 Autism Spectrum (including Asperger’s Syndrome) 
10 Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
11 Down Syndrome 
12 Dementia (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease, Lewy Body Dementia) 
66 Other (specify in diagnosis text), including personality disorders, etc. 
88 Not applicable 
99 Unknown 
 
 CME/LE_MentalHealthDiagnosisOther  
Text 
 
Discussion:  
This variable indicates the nature of the victim’s mental health problem (the diagnosis), if available. 
 
 Code up to two diagnoses and then write in additional diagnoses (i.e., three or more diagnoses) in 
the “MentalHealthDiagnosisOther” field. When using the “MentalHealthDiagnosisOther” field, 
please separate diagnoses with a comma (e.g., antisocial personality disorder, narcissistic 
personality disorder). 
 For cases in which the victim was noted as being treated for a mental health problem, but the actual 
diagnosis is not documented, code “MentalHealthDiagnosis1” as “Unknown.” 
===== Page 82 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  82 | Page  
   
 If a diagnosis is not on the code list, code “Other” and record the diagnosis in the text field, 
“MentalHealthDiagnosisOther.” 
 Do not attempt to infer a diagnosis based on reading the symptoms. 
 While it is acceptable to endorse “Mental health problem” based on the victim’s prescription for a 
psychiatric medication, please do not infer or code a specific mental health diagnosis based on the 
medication. 
 Please note that bipolar disorder may be referred to as “manic depression” or similar terms (e.g., 
“manic depressive”) in source documents. While these are outdated terms, please code these cases 
as “2 – Bipolar Disorder.” 
 Obsessive compulsive disorder may be referred to as “OCD” in source documents. Please code these 
cases as “8 – Obsessive Compulsive Disorder.” 
 Post-traumatic stress disorder may be referred to as “PTSD” in source documents. Please code these 
cases as “5 – Post-traumatic Stress Disorder.”  
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.3.4 Current depressed mood: CME/LE_DepressedMood 
 
Definition:  
Victim was perceived by self or others to be depressed at the time of the injury. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
Only code this variable when the victim had a depressed mood at the time of injury. There does NOT 
need to be a clinical diagnosis, and there does not need to be any indication that the depression directly 
contributed to the death. Other words that can trigger coding this variable besides “depressed” are sad, 
despondent, down, blue, low, unhappy, etc. Words that should not trigger coding this variable are 
agitated, angry, mad, anxious, overwrought, etc. 
 
 If the victim has a known clinical history of depression but had no depressive symptoms at the time 
of the incident, this variable should NOT be selected. 
 Depressed mood should not be inferred by the coder based on the circumstances (e.g., because the 
person reports a bankruptcy); rather it must be noted in the record. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.3.5 Current mental health/substance abuse treatment: 
CME/LE_MentalIllnessTreatmentCurrnt 
 
Definition:  
Currently in treatment for a mental health problem or substance abuse problem. 
 
Response Options: 
===== Page 83 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  83 | Page  
   
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
 This should be coded “Yes” if the victim was in current treatment (e.g., had a current prescription 
for a psychiatric medication, saw a mental health professional within the past two months, or 
participated in treatment for substance abuse such as outpatient treatment or alcohol anonymous) 
at the time of the injury. Treatment includes: 
o Seeing a psychiatrist, psychologist, medical doctor, therapist, or other counselor (including 
religious or spiritual counselors) for a mental health or substance abuse problem; 
o Receiving a prescription for an antidepressant or other psychiatric medicine;  
o Attending anger management classes; 
o Residing in an inpatient, group home, or halfway house facility for mental health or 
substance abuse problems; or 
o Alcohol or narcotics anonymous. 
 Do not code this circumstance based only on a positive toxicology test for psychiatric medications 
(such as antidepressants). There must also be some indication that the victim was actually being 
treated for a mental health condition, such as a current prescription, the report of a family member, 
etc. 
 Note that a diagnosis does not imply that treatment was received. A victim may have been out of 
compliance with treatment for a diagnosed condition.  
 
Note: If you code “Yes” for “Current mental health/substance abuse treatment,” you MUST code “Yes” 
for “Ever treated for mental health/substance abuse.” 
 
Also code: Code “Yes” for either “Current Mental Health Diagnosis,” “Alcohol problem,” or “Other 
substance problem.” 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.3.6   Ever treated for mental health/substance abuse problem: 
CME/LE_HistoryMentalIllnessTreatmnt  
 
D
efinition:  
History of ever being treated for a mental health or substance abuse problem. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
The variable indicates whether the victim was noted as ever having received treatment (e.g., had a 
current prescription for a psychiatric medication, saw a mental health professional within the past two 
months, or participated in self-help program such as alcohol anonymous) for a mental health problem 
(including alcohol and other substance abuse problems), either at the time of death or in the past. 
 
 If a victim is in current treatment, by definition, ever in treatment should be endorsed as well. 
===== Page 84 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  84 | Page  
   
 Do not code this circumstance based only on a positive toxicology test for psychiatric medications 
(such as antidepressants). There must also be some indication that the victim was actually was 
treated for a mental health condition, such as a current prescription, the report of a family member, 
etc. 
 Note that a diagnosis does not imply that treatment was received. A victim may have been out of 
compliance with treatment for a diagnosed condition. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.3.7 Non-adherence to treatment for a mental health or substance abuse problem: 
CME/LE_TreatmentNonAdherence 
 
Definition:  
Victim did not actively participate in a prescribed regimen for their mental health or substance abuse 
treatment or did not follow a set treatment plan as recommended by a mental health or medical 
professional.  
 
Response Option: 
Circumstance checkbox 
 
Discussion:  
This variable should be endorsed if source documents indicate that the victim did not adhere to 
treatment plan(s) as recommended by a mental health or medical professional regarding mental health 
or substance abuse treatment. Treatment includes recommended therapeutic and 
medication/pharmacological interventions. This variable can be endorsed even if mental health 
treatment non-adherence is not thought to have directly contributed to the death. It can also be 
endorsed if the victim could not adhere due to barriers to treatment (e.g., could not afford treatment or 
faced other issues with access to care).  
 
Do not code this variable based only on toxicology results. There must be some indication that the 
victim was not adhering to a prescribed treatment regimen. Non-adherence to mental health treatment 
may be evidenced by:  
 
 Treatment that was recommended/prescribed to the victim but never initiated by the victim (e.g., 
never starting a medication or therapeutic treatment although the treatments were recommended 
or prescribed by a mental health or medical professional). 
 Treatment that the victim began but did not adhere to as prescribed or recommended (e.g., 
inconsistently attending therapy sessions, inconsistently taking or stopping medication without 
consulting a medical professional).  
 
Examples of non-adherence to mental health treatment include:  
 
 The victim was prescribed psychiatric medication by a mental health or medical professional but did 
not start taking the medication, or took recommended medications prescribed by a mental health or 
medical professional but did not take the medicine as prescribed (e.g., the person took too much, 
too little, or inconsistently). 
===== Page 85 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  85 | Page  
   
 The victim was recommended to participate in therapy by a mental health or medical professional 
but never started attending therapy sessions, or participated in the recommended therapeutic 
intervention, but did so inconsistently (e.g., skipped therapy sessions, stopped attending therapy 
sessions without notice) or terminated therapy sessions before the timeframe recommended by a 
medical or mental health professional. 
 The victim did not initiate a mental health or substance abuse treatment program or hospital stay 
despite a mental health or medical professional’s recommendation, or a court order to do so.  
 The victim left/terminated a mental health or substance abuse treatment program or hospital stay 
against the advice of a mental health or medical professional.  
 The victim did not maintain or initiate a treatment plan (e.g., medication, therapy) because they 
faced issues with access to care (e.g., could not afford treatment, did not have transportation, could 
not find a provider, stigma was a barrier, mistrust of medical/mental heal professionals was a 
barrier).  
 
The following should not be endorsed as mental health non-adherence without additional evidence of 
nonadherence:  
 
 A friend or family member (or someone in a non-medical/mental health role) told the victim that 
they should see a therapist, go to a mental health hospital, or start a treatment program, but the 
victim or suspect did not.  
 The victim was scheduled to see a mental health provider but died before the appointment date.  
 Toxicology results were inconsistent with the victim or suspects prescribed medications (e.g., 
toxicology showed more than expected or less than expected amounts of a psychotropic medication 
in the system; non-prescribed psychotropic medications were indicated by the toxicology report).  
 
Note: “Mental health diagnosis,” “Current diagnosed mental health problem,” and “Ever treated” will 
often be endorsed if the non-adherence checkbox is selected, but not always. This can happen for 
several reasons. For example, sometimes a person will be referred to mental health treatment by a 
general medical practitioner or by court order before there is a mental health diagnosis.  
 
Manner of Death: All manners. 
 
 
5.3.8 Alcohol problem: CME/LE_AlcoholProblem 
 
Definition:  
Person has alcohol dependence or alcohol problem. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
 Code as “Yes” if the victim was perceived by self or others to have a problem with, or to be addicted 
to, alcohol. There does not need to be any indication that the alcohol problem directly contributed 
to the death. 
 A victim who is noted as participating in an alcohol rehabilitation program or treatment — including 
self-help groups and 12-step programs — should be coded as “Yes” for “AlcoholProblem” even if the 
===== Page 86 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  86 | Page  
   
victim was noted as being currently sober. 
 A problem from the past (i.e., five years or more ago) that has resolved and no longer appears to 
apply should not be coded. 
 Do not code if victim was using alcohol in the hours preceding the incident, and there is no evidence 
of dependence or a problem.  
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.3.9 Alcohol problem was a crisis: CME/LE_CrisisAlcoholProblem  
 
Definition:  
Examples include an alcoholic who relapsed two days before the death after being sober for six months 
or an alcohol problem causes a conflict at work (e.g., getting fired for drinking) or home just before the 
death. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.3.10 Other substance problem: CME/LE_SubstanceAbuseOther 
 
Definition: 
Person has a non-alcohol related substance abuse problem. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
Code as “Yes” if the victim was perceived by self or others to have a problem with, or to be addicted to 
drugs other than alcohol. There does not need to be any indication that the addiction directly 
contributed to the death. “SubstanceAbuseOther” can be endorsed if a victim was noted as using illicit 
drugs (such as heroin or cocaine), abusing prescription medications (such as pain relievers or Valium), or 
regularly using inhalants (e.g., sniffing gas). 
 
 A victim who is noted as participating in a drug rehabilitation program or treatment, including self-
help groups and 12-step programs, should be coded as “Yes” for “SubstanceAbuseOther” even if the 
victim was noted as being currently clean. 
 A problem from the past (i.e., five years or more ago) that has resolved and no longer appears to 
apply should not be coded. 
 If the victim is mentioned as using illicit drugs, even if addiction or abuse is not specifically 
mentioned, code “SubstanceAbuseOther” as “Yes.” 
 The exception to this is marijuana use. For marijuana, the use must be noted as chronic, abusive, or 
problematic (e.g., “victim smoked marijuana regularly,” “victim’s family indicated he had been 
stoned much of the past month”). 
 If marijuana was used at the time of the incident, and there is no evidence of regular use, addiction, 
===== Page 87 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  87 | Page  
   
or abuse, code to “Other circumstance.” 
 The phrase “history of drug abuse” is sufficient to justify endorsing “SubstanceAbuseOther,” unless 
it is noted that the victim is no longer a drug user. 
 Previously attempting suicide via overdose is not sufficient justification for endorsing 
“SubstanceAbuseOther” in the absence of other information. 
 Do not code based on toxicology findings because multiple reasons could explain the presence of 
the substances. 
 
Note: As of August 2013, a victim who takes methadone is no longer assumed to be in treatment for 
heroin addiction and should be coded as “No” unless other information is available (e.g., taking 
methadone as part of substance abuse treatment). Please note that the victim is taking methadone on 
the toxicology page. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners. 
 
 
5.3.11 Other substance problem was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisSubstanceAbuse 
 
Definition: 
Examples include a victim who experiences a relapse just before the death or a victim whose (non-
alcohol related) substance abuse problem causes a conflict at work (e.g., fired from job due to substance 
use) or home just before the death. 
 
Note: This variable was added in July 2013. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.3.12 Other addiction: CME/LE_OtherAddiction 
 
Definition:  
Person has an addiction other than alcohol or other substance abuse, such as gambling, sexual, etc., that 
appears to have contributed to the death. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No, Not Available, Unknown  
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
Code as “Yes” if the victim was perceived by self or others to have an addiction not related to alcohol or 
other substance abuse such as gambling or sexual addictions, and there is some indication that this 
addiction may have contributed to the death. 
 
The incident narrative should describe the nature of the addiction. 
 
Note: This variable was added in 2009. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
===== Page 88 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  88 | Page  
   
 
 
5.3.13 Other addiction was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisOtherAddiction 
 
Definition:  
An example is a victim whose gambling problem causes a conflict at work or home just before the death. 
 
Note: This variable was added in July 2013. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.3.14 History of Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI): CME/LE_TraumaticBrainInjuryHistory  
 
Definition:  
Victim had a history of traumatic brain injury (TBI). 
 
Response Options:  
0  No, Not Available, Unknown  
1  Yes  
 
Discussion: 
This variable is intended to represent victims who have a history of experiencing a traumatic brain injury 
(TBI). A bump, blow, jolt to the head/body, or penetrating head injury can cause a TBI resulting in the 
disruption of normal brain function. TBI may lead to a wide-range of outcomes affecting cognitive 
function, emotion, motor function, and/or sensation. The intent of this variable is to capture cases 
where a victim had a history of a head injury. The term traumatic brain injury may not be in the report, 
and that level of detail may not be in the report but can still be included. Additionally, the victim does 
not have to have been seen by or been diagnosed with a TBI for you to endorse this variable.  
History of TBI may be evidenced by C/ME, LE or other source document information that notes that the 
victim had:  
 
 Previously fell and hit head 
 An accident with a head injury 
 Experienced a concussion 
 Prior traumatic brain injury  
 Previously experienced head trauma or injury unrelated to cause of death 
 History of a brain injury, head injury, head trauma, or blast injury (most commonly experienced 
among military veterans) 
 Known to have experienced several concussions while playing football (or another sport) as a 
child/adolescent, but may not have complained of any side effects (e.g., headache) 
It is important to note that this is a history of TBI that is separate and distinct from the present injury 
that caused death.  The following situations would not be considered a history of TBI: 
 
 Head injury or brain injury that occurred during the fatal incident (e.g., gunshot wound to head, 
trauma sustained after jumping from bridge) 
===== Page 89 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  89 | Page  
   
 Anoxia (loss of oxygen) due to the manner of death. For example, an anoxic brain injury that 
happened at birth would not be coded.  
Note: For additional information on TBI: https://www.cdc.gov/traumaticbraininjury/index.html  
This variable was added in November 2020. 
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths. 
 
 
5.4 Relationships, Abuse, and Life Stressors 
 
 
5.4.1 Intimate partner violence related: CME/LE_IntimatePartnerViolence 
 
Definition: 
This variable identifies cases in which the homicide or legal intervention is related to immediate or 
ongoing conflict or violence between current or former intimate partners. This includes all deaths where 
a victim is killed by their current or former intimate partner. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
 Definition of Intimate Partner±: 
For all intimate partner-related variables, intimate partner± is defined as a current or former 
girlfriend/boyfriend, dating partner, ongoing sexual partner, or spouse. It DOES NOT include 
instances of sex/intimacy in exchange for money/goods. There must be evidence of an intimate 
relationship (this does not apply to instances where there is simply attraction/infatuation between 
two individuals or in cases where one person is romantically interested in the other, but the feelings 
are not returned). The definition of intimate partner does not require sexual intimacy. This definition 
includes same-sex partners.  
 This should be coded to represent a fatal incident in which an intimate partner kills their current or 
former intimate partner (e.g., husband kills wife) or where intimate partner conflict contributed to 
the death of the victim. 
 Use this code for “domestic disputes” or ”domestic violence” homicides or legal interventions. The 
narrative should indicate the nature of the dispute (e.g., end of relationship, divorce, or custody 
dispute) and who was involved in the dispute. 
 In some instances, this code will be applied in cases associated with intimate partner violence but 
are not deaths of the intimate partners themselves. 
o Use this code for cases in which one intimate partner kills their partner’s new or former 
intimate partner (e.g., ex-husband kills his ex-wife’s new boyfriend), or the person the 
partner is having an affair with (e.g., husband kills the man his wife had an affair with). 
o Use this code for cases in which someone is killed when someone intervenes in an intimate 
partner violence incident. For instance, a bystander witnessed a man assaulting his wife. The 
bystander tried to intervene and was shot by the husband. Use this code when the suspect 
retaliates in response to an intimate partner violence incident (e.g., son killed his mother’s 
boyfriend after finding out that the boyfriend had assaulted her). 
===== Page 90 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  90 | Page  
   
o Use this code if other people are also killed (a child, friend of the victim, a bystander), and 
even if the intimate partner is not (e.g., boyfriend kills his girlfriend’s child because he is 
angry at her).  
o Use this code when the perpetrator of intimate partner violence is killed by law 
enforcement (e.g., victim was attacking spouse when police responded, and victim then 
attacked police and was killed). 
o Remember not to code cases where the suspect had a romantic interest, but never dated 
the victim or his/her intimate partners. Code the following violent incident “No”: The 
suspect and his friend began arguing over a girl at party that they both were interested in, 
but neither had ever dated. The argument escalated and the suspect pulled out a knife and 
killed his friend. 
 
Manner of Death: Homicide and legal intervention.  
 
± This definition is based on the CDC/National Center for Injury Prevention and Control standard 
definition of Intimate Partner Violence.  Source: 
http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/ipv_surveillance_definitions.pdf 
 
 
5.4.2 Intimate partner problem: CME/LE_IntimatePartnerProblem 
 
Definition:  
Problems with a current or former intimate partner appear to have contributed to the suicide or 
undetermined death. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Code as “Yes” if at the time of the incident the victim was experiencing problems with a current or 
former intimate partner, such as a divorce, break-up, argument, jealousy, conflict, or discord, and this 
appears to have contributed to the death. 
 
 Definition of Intimate partner: 
For all intimate partner-related variables intimate partner± is defined as a current or former 
girlfriend/boyfriend, dating partner, ongoing sexual partner, or spouse. It DOES NOT include 
instances of sex/intimacy in exchange for money/goods. There must be evidence of an intimate 
relationship (this does not apply to instances where there is simply attraction/infatuation between 
two individuals or in cases where one person is romantically interested in the other, but the feelings 
are not returned).  The definition of intimate partner does not require sexual intimacy. This definition 
includes same-sex partners.  
 The burden of caring for an ill spouse or partner should not be coded as an intimate partner 
problem unless there is also evidence of relationship problems. 
 Phrases such as “victim was having relationship problems” can be assumed to indicate intimate 
partner problems. 
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
===== Page 91 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  91 | Page  
   
 
± This definition is based on the CDC/National Center for Injury Prevention and Control standard 
definition of Intimate Partner Violence. Source: 
http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/ipv_surveillance_definitions.pdf 
 
 
5.4.3 Intimate partner problem was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisIntimatePartnerProblem 
 
Examples include the victim found out the morning of her suicide that her husband had filed for a 
divorce, the victim had a very bad argument with his wife about his drinking problem two days before 
the suicide, or the victim found out a week ago that his spouse was having an affair and moved out of 
their house. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.4.4 Family relationship problem: CME/LE_FamilyRelationship 
 
Definition:  
Victim had relationship problems with a family member (other than an intimate partner) that appear to 
have contributed to the death. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Code as “Yes” if at the time of the incident the victim was experiencing a relationship problem with a 
family member other than an intimate partner (e.g., a child, mother, in-law), and this appears to have 
contributed to the death. This variable does NOT capture problems related to the family environment 
that do not explicitly pertain to the victim’s relationship with a family member (e.g., the stress of caring 
for a sick family member).  
 
 S uicide ex ample: The victim is despondent over his argument with his parents and dies by suicide. 
 Homicide example: The victim and his brother are estranged and get into a fight at a family reunion 
in which the victim is killed. 
o I f the report indicates that the victim was “having relationship problems ,” these should be 
assumed to be intimate partner problems, and not problems with other friends or family. 
o This code should not be endorsed for custody disputes when the victim is a child because 
the relationship problem in these instances is typically not with a child or other non-intimate 
partner family member. If the custody dispute affects the relationship of the parent and 
child, then this should be coded “Yes.” 
o Narrative should contain an explanation of the relationship problem and identify the family 
member with whom the victim had a problem. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013 and replaced family stressor, but the coding guidance 
===== Page 92 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  92 | Page  
   
associated with that variable was also changed.  It also changed the focus of “Other relationship 
problem” (see Section 5.4.8) to exclude relationship problems with family, which are now captured 
here. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.4.5 Family relationship problem was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisFamilyRelationship 
 
Examples include the victim has a bad argument with his brother the day before his brother attacks and 
kills him or the victim has an argument with his parents about a school suspension the night before the 
suicide. 
 
 
5.4.6 Caregiver burden: CME/LE_CaregiverBurden 
 
Definition: 
Stress or burden perceived by the victim as a caregiver of a chronically ill, disabled, or elderly person 
appears to have contributed to the death. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No, Not Available, Unknown  
1  Yes  
 
Discussion: 
This variable should be endorsed if the physical, psychological, emotional, social, or financial stressors 
associated with the victim’s caregiving experience contributed to the death. This should not be 
endorsed for caregivers of healthy children. 
 
Examples of caregiver burden include: 
 
 The victim/suspect was upset that he could no longer care for his ailing wife due to his own 
declining health, so he killed his wife and then died by suicide.  
 The victim was stressed that her medical insurance was running out, and she could no longer afford 
to take care of her disabled adult son, so she died by suicide. 
 
Note: This variable was added in November 2020.  
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths. 
 
 
5.4.7 Family stressor: CME/LE_FamilyStressor 
 
Definition:  
A family stressor(s) appears to have contributed to the death.  
 
===== Page 93 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  93 | Page  
   
Response Options: 
0  No, Not Available, Unknown 
1  Yes  
 
Discussion:  
This variable should be endorsed if at the time of the incident the victim was experiencing significant 
problems related to the family home environment that are not related to relationship problems and 
involve family members other than intimate partners. This is meant to differentiate outside stressors 
placed upon the family from problems between family members. The stressor is affecting the victim and 
family unit. Describe the nature of these problems in the narrative. 
 
C
onflict or strife between family members who are also intimate partners (e.g., spouses) requires some 
additional consideration. If the victim is one of the intimate partners, code “Intimate partner problem,” 
but not “Family stressors.” If the victim is not one of the intimate partners (such as a child distraught 
over parental conflict), then this circumstance may be endorsed. Examples of family stressors include:  
  
 A child (i.e., victim) takes their own life, and a suicide note indicates the child could no longer live in 
the house where their parents argued all of the time. 
 A family member is serving jail time, and this is causing stress on the family unit. 
 Substance abuse of family member(s) is causing stress on the family unit. 
 Experience of illness or disease of a family member is causing stress on the family. This variable 
applies to the whole family (including a caregiver) but is different from the new caregiver stress 
variable.  
 Parental depression due to parent(s) moving into a nursing home was causing stress among the 
children.  
 A family member is moving back home under stressful circumstances (e.g., recently released from 
jail or rehab facility, illness, dropped out of college, loss of job), that are causing stress in the family.  
 Drug addicted sibling disrupting household and is causing stress on the family.  
Family stressors are NOT anything that would be considered “Family relationship problem”: Victim had 
relationship problems with a family member (other than an intimate partner) that appear to have 
contributed to the death. However, it is possible for both family stressor and family relationship 
problem to be endorsed for a single case, but they should not be referring to the same problem. For 
example: 
 
 A man died by suicide after getting upset with his adult son for having to move home because of 
substance abuse issues (family relationship problem), AND his wife had dementia, which was putting 
stress on the family unit (family stressor).  
It is important to note that “Family stressor” should be capturing outside stressors placed upon the 
family as opposed to “Family relationship problem,” which captures relationship problems between 
non-intimate partner family members.  
 
Note: In 2013, the variable, “Family stressor,” was replaced with “Family relationship problem,” and the 
coding guidance for this variable was also changed.  This new family stressor variable does not replace 
“Family relationship problem,” and is therefore defined differently than the original “Family stressor” 
variable – it is intended to capture family problems that are not relationship-oriented in nature, 
===== Page 94 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  94 | Page  
   
providing more representation of family circumstances that may be relevant to deaths captured by 
NVDRS.  
 
Note: This variable was added in November 2020. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners. 
 
 
5.4.8 Other relationship problem: CME/LE_RelationshipProblemOth 
 
Definition:  
Problems with a friend or associate (other than an intimate partner or family member) appear to have 
contributed to the death. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
Code as “Yes” if at the time of the incident the victim was experiencing a relationship problem with 
someone other than an intimate partner or other family member (e.g., a friend or schoolmate), and this 
appears to have contributed to the death. 
 
 S uicide example: The victim was upset because she had a falling out with her childhood friend who 
would no longer talk to her. 
 Homicide example:  The victim was having a problem with one of his friends (i.e., the suspect) who 
kept stealing things from his house due to a drug problem. When the victim tried to take one of the 
items back from his house, the suspect shot him. 
o D o not code relationship problems  for co-workers or supervisors (e.g., boss) with whom the 
victim is not friends or had a romantic relationship. Consider coding these as “job 
problems.” 
o If the report indicates that the victim was “having relationship problems,” these should be 
assumed to be intimate partner problems, and not problems with other friends or family or 
other relationship problems. 
o Narrative should contain an explanation of the relationship problem and identify the person 
with whom the victim had a relationship problem. 
 
Note: Before August 2013, this included any relationship except intimate partners. After August 2013, 
this includes any relationship except intimate partner or family relationships. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.4.9 Other relationship problem was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisRelationshipProblemOther 
 
Examples include a close friend telling the victim the night before the suicide that he can no longer be 
friends with him, or the victim kicks a friend out of his house because he cannot pay rent and the friend 
comes back the next day and shoots him. 
===== Page 95 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  95 | Page  
   
 
Note: This variable was added in July 2013. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.4.10 Household known to local authorities: CME/LE_HouseholdKnownAuthorities 
 
Definition: 
Victim’s household had contact with local authorities. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No, Not Available, Unknown  
1  Yes  
 
Discussion: 
 Refers to the household’s history of contact with local authorities prior to the fatal incident. An 
arrest does not need to have been made to endorse this variable. This may include scenarios where 
LE was called, but no charges were filed. “Household” is defined as the residence where the victim 
lived the majority of the time when the fatal incident occurred. Household was chosen as the unit 
for this variable in an attempt to characterize the victim’s environment; therefore, contact does not 
necessarily have to involve the victim or the suspect. If the source document(s) state that the 
household had previous contact with local authorities, this variable should be endorsed even if no 
further specifics are provided.. 
Examples: 
 A Child Protective Services (CPS) referral (also called intake) made  on the household for alleged 
child abuse and/or neglect. A CPS referral also includes anyone calling to report suspected child 
abuse and/or neglect. Child is defined as a person younger than 18 years of age. 
 A child victim (i.e., a person younger than 18 years of age) was previously in foster care or was in 
foster care at the time of the fatal event. Also, code “Victim known to local authorities” and “Prior 
Child Protective Services report on the child victim’s household.” If applicable, also code 
“Abuse/neglect led to death” and/or “History of abuse or neglect as a child.” 
 The victim’s uncle, who lived with the victim, was a known drug dealer and had contact with 
authorities .  
Note: This variable should be endorsed only if the source document(s) state that someone in the 
household, other than the victim, had previous contact with local authorities. Code “Victim known to 
local authorities” if the victim was known to authorities. Both variables can be endorsed in certain 
situations; they are not mutually exclusive. Please see variable “Victim known to authorities” for further 
examples of when it is appropriate to code both “Household known to local authorities” and “Victim 
known to local authorities.” 
 
Note: This variable was added in November 2020.  
 
Manner of Death: All manners. 
===== Page 96 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  96 | Page  
   
 
 
5.4.11 Victim known to authorities: CME/LE_VictimContact 
 
Definition:  
Victim had contact with or was otherwise known to authorities.  
 
Response Options:  
0  No, Not Available, Unknown  
1  Yes  
 
Discussion:  
This variable refers to the victim’s history of contact with local, state, federal, or international 
authorities prior to the fatal incident. “Authorities” encompasses anyone who is in a position of 
authority (e.g., LE, EMS, child protective services, public safety officer, judge), who has the power or 
right to give orders, make decisions, and/or enforce obedience. Being “known” to authorities may or 
may not involve direct contact on the part of the victim.  Victim was chosen as the unit for this variable 
because its intent is to identify warning signs, stressors, and/or opportunities for intervention associated 
with specific individual victims and not the victim’s household environment. If source document(s) state 
that the victim had previous contact with authorities this variable should be endorsed even if no further 
specifics are provided. 
 
General Guidance: 
 Code “Yes” if the victim was known to authorities for previous incarcerations, substance misuse, 
arrests, prostitution, mental health problems, welfare checks, homelessness, etc. .  
 Code “Yes” if the victim had an arrest that was mentioned in source documents.  
 Code “Yes” if a child victim (i.e., a person younger than 18 years of age) was previously in foster care 
or was in foster care at the time of the fatal eventAlso, code “Household known to local authorities” 
and “Prior Child Protective Services report on the child victim’s household.” If applicable, also code 
“Abuse/neglect led to death” and/or “History of abuse or neglect as a child.” 
 Code “Yes” if, per the source document(s), the victim was previously or currently (where applicable) 
on probation or parole, out on bail, on house arrest, wearing a GPS device or ankle monitor, a 
registered sex offender, under investigation for a crime, awaiting sentencing for a crime they had 
been convicted of, had a restraining or protective order against them that had been served, had 
filed a restraining or protective order against someone, or had a warrant out for their arrest at the 
time of the fatal injury. These abovementioned encounters with authorities mean that the victim 
was under ongoing “supervision” and was therefore known by authorities. 
 Code “Yes” if, per the source document(s), the victim was previously or currently (where applicable) 
under court-ordered substance abuse treatment, anger management or parenting training, or under 
supervised visitation in order to visit with their child(ren) at the time of the fatal injury. These 
abovementioned encounters with local authorities mean that the victim was under an ongoing 
“supervised” mandate(s) and was therefore known by authorities. 
 Code “No” if a person(s) in the household, other than the victim, was known by authorities. Because 
individuals may move in and out of different households, and we may not be able to infer that an 
individual in the household, other than the victim, being known to the authorities, impacted a 
particular victim. 
===== Page 97 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  97 | Page  
   
 Code “No” if the only known contact the victim had with authorities was the contact they had at the 
time of the fatal incident. 
Examples of when to Code “Yes” for this variable: 
 
 EMS, LE, or public safety patrol officers (e.g., non-law enforcement officers who patrol areas for 
public health issues such as persons experiencing homelessness, prostitution) had responded to calls 
involving the victim once or on several occasions. 
 LE had arrested the victim once or multiple times. 
 Source documents indicate that LE had been called to the household by neighbors for a domestic 
disturbance involving the victim.  
 The victim had contact with first responders (e.g., EMS, LE, public safety officer) for one or more 
non-fatal drug overdoses, acute mental health crisis, person experiencing homelessness seeking 
assistance, etc.  
 A Child Protective Services referral (also called intake) was made on the child victim for alleged child 
abuse and/or neglect by the hands of the perpetrator or another adult. Also code “Prior Child 
Protective Services report on the child victim’s household,” and because children are dependents 
and therefore are a part of a household, code “Household known to local authorities.” If applicable, 
also code “Abuse/neglect led to death” and/or “History of abuse or neglect as a child.” 
 On the morning of the fatal incident, the victim told his mother that he would fail his court 
mandated drug test later in the day and was faced with jail time if he failed. He later died by suicide. 
 The victim was known to LE and EMS as having untreated bipolar disorder, and they had been to his 
residence several times for previous suicide attempts as well as altered mental state transports. 
 The victim was known to authorities as someone with an alcohol abuse problem or was taken into 
protective custody for public drunkenness. 
 LE were called to the victim’s residence for a domestic disturbance one month prior to victim’s 
death. At this time, the suspect (ex-boyfriend) was arrested, but the victim chose not to file a 
restraining order against the ex-boyfriend. The victim was killed a month later by the ex-boyfriend.  
 Victim was killed by her husband. Officers on scene knew the victim and suspect because they had 
responded to the residence earlier that day for a domestic disturbance.  
 LE were attempting to serve a restraining order on the victim for kidnapping and assault, and when 
they arrived at the victim’s home, the victim shot himself, dying by suicide. 
 Victim was arrested the night prior for operating a vehicle while under the influence after a minor 
traffic accident. The victim died by suicide a week later. 
 
Examples of when to Code “No” for this variable: 
 
 The victim’s uncle, who lived with the victim, was a known drug dealer and had contact with 
authorities. While the victim’s uncle was a known drug dealer, it was unclear whether the victim had 
contact with authorities. Code “Household known to local authorities” Instead. 
 LE had been called to the household by neighbors for a domestic disturbance where the husband 
attacked his wife. The husband later divorced the wife, moved his girlfriend in the home, and killed 
the new girlfriend within one month of moving her in. Because the girlfriend (i.e., the victim in the 
fatal incident), was not a part of the household during this initial domestic disturbance call and per 
the source documents, had no contact with authorities prior to the fatal event, code “No” for this 
===== Page 98 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  98 | Page  
   
variable. Code “Household known to authorities” (and “Suspect had been in contact with law 
enforcement”) instead. 
 A Child Protective Services referral (also called intake) was made on the household for alleged child 
abuse and/or neglect, but nothing indicates that it specifically involved the child victim, code 
“Household known to local authorities” and “Prior Child Protective Services report on the child 
victim’s household.” If applicable, also code “Abuse/neglect led to death” and/or “History of abuse 
or neglect as a child.” 
 Victim was known to LE solely because they were a current or former LE officer or family member of 
a current or former LE officer. 
 The victim was known to police because he had been reported missing and there had been several 
search parties looking for him over the past few days. If the victims’s missing person report was the 
first “encounter” the victim had with police, then it can be assumed that their disappearance was 
part of their fatal injury. 
 
Note: This variable should be endorsed only if the victim had contact with authorities. Code “Household 
known to local authorities” variable if persons in the household, other than the victim, were known to 
local authorities. Both variables can be endorsed in certain situations; they are not mutually exclusive. 
 
Examples of when to Code “Yes” for both “Victim known to authorities” and “Household known to local 
authorities”: 
 
 LE had been called to the household by neighbors for a domestic disturbance where the husband 
was identified as the aggressor, and the wife, who is the victim in the fatal incident, was also 
identified as a victim in the prior domestic disturbance. In this example, both the household and the 
victim were known by authorities.  
 EMS and/or LE had been called to the household for one or more non-fatal drug overdoses for 
multiple persons in the household, including the victim, and administered a fast-acting remedy (e.g., 
Narcan) for an opioid overdose for the victim and others in the household. In a later incident, the 
victim died from a fatal drug overdose at the household. In this example, since Narcan was 
administered on the victim and others in the household, and the victim died of a drug overdose in a 
later incident, both the victim and the household were known by authorities. 
 A child victim (i.e., a person younger than 18 years of age) was previously in foster care or was in 
foster care at the time of the fatal event. Because children are dependents and therefore are a part 
of a household, code “Household known to local authorities” and “Prior Child Protective Services 
report on the child victim’s household.” If applicable, also code “Abuse/neglect led to death” and/or 
“History of abuse or neglect as a child.” 
 A Child Protective Services referral (also called intake) was made on the child victim for alleged child 
abuse and/or neglect by the hands of the perpetrator or another adult. Because children are 
dependents and therefore are a part of a household, code “Household known to local authorities” 
and “Prior Child Protective Services report on the child victim’s household.” If applicable, also code 
“Abuse/neglect led to death” and/or “History of abuse or neglect as a child.” 
 EMS and/or LE had been called to the household when a couple’s adult son, who was experiencing 
an acute mental health crisis, attacked his mother. The adult son later killed his mother, and his 
behavior in the fatal event towards his mother was believed to be a direct result of a mental illness. 
In this example, both the household and the victim were known authorities. 
===== Page 99 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  99 | Page  
   
Note: This variable was added in August 2021.  
 
Manner of Death: All manners. 
 
5.4.12 Abuse/neglect led to death: CME/LE_DeathAbuse 
 
Definition:  
The victim experienced abuse± (physical, sexual, or psychological) or neglect (physical, including 
medical/dental, emotional, or educational neglect; or exposure to violent environments; or inadequate 
supervision) by a caregiver that resulted in death. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
This variable identifies homicides where the victim died as a result of injuries sustained due to abuse or 
neglect and suicides related to ongoing or past experiences of abuse or neglect. This includes all sources 
of abuse/neglect, including child abuse, elder abuse, and other abuse by a caretaker. Indicate the nature 
of the abuse in the incident narrative. 
 
 Abuse can be physical, psychological, sexual, or another type, as long as the source document refers 
to “abuse.” 
 Intimate partner violence or intimate partner problems should NOT be coded when using this code; 
these should be coded as “Intimate partner violence.” 
 Homicides 
o Code “Yes” if the victim died as a result of injuries from a single or multiple episode of abuse 
or because of ongoing abuse by a caregiver.  
o Code “Yes” if the suspect was a caregiver for the victim.  
 Suicides 
o Code “Yes” if a single incident or ongoing or past abuse by a caregiver was seen as a 
precipitating factor for the suicide (e.g., victim despondent over being abused by his 
grandfather the week before the suicide). 
o If there is evidence of abuse (e.g., victim was abused by father as a child), but no clear 
indication that this abuse led to the death, then do NOT code “DeathAbuse.” Instead, you 
should code “History of abuse/neglect as a child.” 
 Examples that should be coded “Yes”: 
o The victim was an elderly man who died of multiple wounds received as a result of physical 
abuse by his paid caregiver. 
o The day before the suicide the victim was despondent and depressed about confronting her 
parents about past abuse. 
o A child victim was shot and killed by a caregiver (e.g., father, mother). Although there were 
no signs of on-going abuse/neglect, and the fatal event may have been the first noted 
incident of abuse/neglect, the death of the child was a severe abusive act that led to their 
death. 
 
Also code: Code History of abuse/neglect as a child, if applicable. 
 
===== Page 100 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  100 | Page  
   
Note: The variable was added in August 2013. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
±Source: Leeb RT, Paulozzi L, Melanson C, Simon T, Arias I. Child Maltreatment Surveillance: Uniform 
Definitions for Public Health and Recommended Data Elements, Version 1.0. Atlanta (GA): Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control; 2008. Available from: 
http://www.cdc.gov/ViolencePrevention/pub/CMP-Surveillance.html 
 
 
5.4.13 History of abuse or neglect as a child: CME/LE_AbusedAsChild 
 
Definition:  
The victim had a history of abuse± (physical, sexual, or psychological) or neglect (physical, including 
medical/dental, emotional, or educational neglect; or exposure to violent environments; or inadequate 
supervision) as a child. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
This variable more broadly captures victim’s experiences of abuse and neglect irrespective of its 
relationship to the violent death. Code “Yes” if the victim experienced abuse or neglect, but there is no 
direct link to the violent death, or the link is unknown. 
 
 Do NOT code if the abuse or neglect directly causes or precipitated the death, instead code 
abuse/neglect led to death. 
 Code “Yes” if the victim had been the victim of child abuse at any point in the past, even if the victim 
is currently an adult. 
 Code “Yes” if the evidence of ongoing abuse is suspected but not confirmed. Code “Yes” if autopsy 
evidence reported an indication of previous abuse. 
 Abuse can be physical, psychological, sexual, or other as long as the source document refers to 
“abuse.” Neglect may be medical, physical, or emotional. 
 Indicate the nature of the abuse or neglect in the incident narrative.  
 Abuse could have been perpetrated by a caregiver or other individual. 
 
Note: This variable was added in 2009. Before August 2013, this variable was used to collect deaths 
related to abuse and deaths related to intimate partner violence that had a history of abuse. As of 
August 2013, this variable captures any history of abuse as a child outside the fatal incident. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
±Source: Leeb RT, Paulozzi L, Melanson C, Simon T, Arias I. Child Maltreatment Surveillance: Uniform 
Definitions for Public Health and Recommended Data Elements, Version 1.0. Atlanta (GA): Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control; 2008. Available from: 
http://www.cdc.gov/ViolencePrevention/pub/CMP-Surveillance.html 
 
===== Page 101 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  101 | Page  
   
 
5.4.14 Previous perpetrator of violence in the past month:  
CME/LE_InterpersonalViolencePerpet 
 
Definition:  
Victim was a perpetrator of violence within the past month that was distinct and occurred before the 
violence that killed the victim. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
This variable refers to all violence (e.g., a robbery of a stranger or an assault in a bar). 
 
 There does not need to be any causal link between the earlier violence and the death itself. 
 This variable should also be coded “Yes” if a restraining order has been filed against the victim 
within the past month. 
 This should NOT be coded to represent the fatal incident. For instance, if the victim is killed while 
assaulting another person, this variable would be coded “No.” 
 A victim/suspect who perpetrates a homicide and then dies by suicide (e.g., homicide followed by 
suicide) should be coded as “Yes.”  
 
Also code: Intimate partner violence or intimate partner problem, if applicable. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.4.15 Previous victim of violence in the past month: CME/LE_InterpersonalViolenceVictim 
 
Definition:  
Victim experienced violence in the past month that was distinct and occurred before the violence that 
killed the victim. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
This variable refers to all violence (e.g., a robbery targeting the victim, or the victim is assaulted in a bar 
two weeks before the incident). 
 
 Intimate partner violence should be coded as “Yes.” For example, code “Yes” if a victim was 
assaulted by her husband two weeks before she was killed by him. 
 There does not need to be any causal link between the earlier violence and the death itself (e.g., 
victim experienced a robbery by a stranger two weeks before being killed by his spouse). 
 This should NOT be coded to represent the violence involved in the fatal incident. For example, the 
victim dies of a result of a fight in a bar. 
===== Page 102 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  102 | Page  
   
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.4.16 Physical fight between two people: CME/LE_FightBetweenTwoPeople 
 
Definition:  
Immediately before the violent death, there was a physical fight between two individuals which resulted 
in the death of individuals involved in the fight, bystanders, or individuals trying to stop the fight. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
This code is meant to capture violent deaths that appear unplanned and occur in the heat of a physical 
confrontation. Code all physical confrontations (e.g., slapping, pushing, punching, kicking, scratching, 
etc.). 
 
 This should NOT be coded when the suspect attacks the victim as part of a crime (e.g., an attempted 
robbery or burglary) or in an unprovoked manner (e.g., walks up and attacks the person or 
ambushes them from a hiding place) even if a physical fight ensues. Consider coding “Precipitated 
by another crime” and “First other crime in progress” or “Walk-by assault.” 
 Most physical fights will be preceded by arguments. In these cases, the abstractor should also code 
“Argument” and “Timing of argument.” 
 When this code is endorsed, the narratives should provide information on what the physical fight 
was about, whether the conflict was new or was related to a series of arguments, and whether the 
fight occurred in a private or in public setting. 
 When a SHR indicates a “brawl,” it may be a physical fight (i.e., physical confrontation among two 
people) or a brawl (i.e., physical confrontation among three or more people) in NVDRS. Please 
review the narrative and code appropriately. 
 S uicide example:  The victim was arguing with his father and got into a pushing match, which 
resulted in the victim being pushed to the ground. The victim was very upset and went into the next 
room and died by suicide with a handgun. 
 Homicide examples: 
o The suspect was asking to see his ex-wife and a new boyfriend would not let him in to see 
her. They scuffled and the boyfriend threw the suspect out of the house. At that point, the 
suspect pulled a gun and shot and killed the boyfriend. 
o The suspect and his friend began arguing over a girl at party that they both were interested 
in. The argument escalated, and the suspect pulled out a knife. The friend and suspect 
began scuffling. The victim attempted to break up the fight between the suspect and his 
friend and was stabbed. 
 
Also code: Almost always an argument will precede the physical fight. Thus, consider coding “Argument” 
and “Timing of the most recent argument” when coding this variable. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013. 
 
===== Page 103 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  103 | Page  
   
Manner of Death: All manners. 
 
 
5.4.17 Argument: CME/LE_Argument 
 
Definition:  
An argument or conflict led to the victim’s death. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
This variable identifies violent deaths where a specific argument was perceived as related to the death. 
There must be a specific argument or disagreement that is related to the violent death (e.g., an 
argument over money, a relationship problem, or an insult) to code this variable “Yes.” 
 
 The following should be coded “Yes”: 
o H omicide example: If a verbal argument immediately escalates into a physical confrontation 
(e.g., a bar argument leads to a fight where the victim is killed), code argument as “Yes.” 
o Suicide exa mples:  
 If a child has an argument with their parent, becomes distraught, and then dies by 
suicide that night, code “Yes.” 
 A principal expels the victim from school after which victim dies by suicide. 
 Victim has an argument with his boss over poor performance then goes to a local 
park and dies by suicide. 
 If there are chronic arguments, code “Yes” if a specific argument is noted (e.g., child 
and parent argued a lot, and they had a very upsetting argument the night before 
the suicide). 
 The following should be coded “No”: 
o A relationship problem is insufficient to code this variable. A specific argument prior to the 
death must be noted in the investigative reports. 
o If it was only reported the child argued constantly with his parents, but no specific argument 
was noted in the investigative reports. Note: This should be coded using the “Family 
relationship problem” variable. 
o Ongoing conflicts (e.g., a husband and wife argue a lot, but no specific argument was noted 
prior to death. [Note: this information should be coded using the intimate partner problem 
or family relationship problem variable]).  
o If the victim had a history of abuse by the suspect, argument would be coded “No” unless 
there was a specific argument related to victim’s death (e.g., victim, an elderly man, told his 
caregiver that he was going to report him to the police for abuse before the caretaker killed 
him). 
 The following types of death should also be coded as “No”: 
o The victim is killed committing a crime such as robbery or burglary not motivated by a 
previous argument with the victim. 
o The victim is killed by law enforcement acting in the line of duty. 
o The victim is killed while committing a crime (e.g., robbery, assault) by sanctioned security 
or a person acting in self-defense. 
===== Page 104 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  104 | Page  
   
 
Also code: Always complete “Timing of the most recent argument” when this variable is checked. 
 
Note: This variable was modified in two ways in August 2013. First, the “Other argument” and 
“Argument over money and property” variables were combined into a single variable. Second, the 
previous prohibition not to use this code when “Intimate partner violence” and “Jealousy between 
intimate partners” are coded has been removed. Code based on the guidance above regardless of other 
circumstances checked. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.4.18 Timing of the most recent argument: CME/LE_ArgumentTiming 
 
Definition:  
Timing of the argument that led to victim’s death 
 
Response Options: 
1 Injury occurred during argument 
2 Injury occurred within 24 hours, but not during argument  
3 Injury occurred between 24 hours and 2 weeks after argument 
4 Injury occurred more than 2 weeks after argument 
9 Timing unknown 
 
Discussion:  
This variable can help determine what percent of violent deaths are immediately preceded by or occur 
within two weeks of an argument. 
 
 This variable is only completed when “argument” is checked. 
 Violence is considered as occurring during an argument if the violence occurs immediately following 
an argument (e.g., the victim dies by suicide right after arguing with his wife) or the suspect leaves 
the argument to grab a weapon that they immediately use to kill the suspect. 
 If the argument is described as “leading to the violence” or occurring “just” before violence, code 
“1”, or “Injury occurred during argument.” 
 If there is a pause between the argument and the violence (e.g., suspect comes back the next day to 
attack the victim with which he argued or the suicide occurs the morning after the argument), first 
see if the timeframe is clearly established in the source documents.   
o If the timeframe is clearly established, and the attack is within 24 hours of the argument, 
this should be code as occurring “within 24 hours but not during argument.” 
o If it the timeframe is clearly established, and the attack is not within 24 hours, code as 
occurring “between 24 hours and 2 weeks” of the argument. 
o If the timeframe is not clearly established, but just expressed as “the next day,” code as 
occurring “between 24 hours and 2 weeks” of the argument.  
 If the argument was described as occurring “recently” or using similar terminology that denotes an 
unspecified timeframe in the recent past (i.e., the victim has been very upset since his recent 
argument with his boss), code as “3”, or “Injury occurred between 24 hours and 2 weeks after 
argument.”  
 
===== Page 105 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  105 | Page  
   
Note: This variable was added in August 2013. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.4.19  Disaster exposure: CME/LE_DisasterExposure  
 
Definition: 
Exposure to a disaster was perceived as a contributing factor in incident  
 
Response Options:  
0  No, Not Available, Unknown  
1  Yes  
 
Discussion:  
The variable identifies the proportion of violent deaths that are a consequence of exposure to a natural 
or man-made disaster of any kind.  
 
In the narrative, specify the type(s) of disaster: nuclear accident, earthquake, bombing, hurricane, flood, 
tornado, wildfire, pandemic or other infectious disease epidemic or outbreak (please specify pandemic 
or disease outbreak [e.g., coronavirus, also known as COVID-19 or SARS-CoV-2]). Examples include:  
 
 A person was distraught over losing their house (which was uninsured) due to flooding. The suicide 
occurred a month after the flood.  
 A woman died by suicide after finding out that her children died during an earthquake. 
 A man died by suicide, and his neighbors reported that he had been devastated by his family’s 
recent loss of their home in the area wildfires. 
 A tornado destroyed a woman’s place of business, and she had to close the business while it was 
being rebuilt. She subsequently had to file for bankruptcy, which she did on the day she died by 
suicide. 
 A store security guard was killed by a woman’s partner who became angry that the guard had asked 
the woman to wear a surgical mask in compliance with state laws during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 A woman was killed by her partner, with case reports noting that neighbors mentioned witnessing 
the partner drinking more and becoming more violent since stay at home orders related to COVID-
19 began in the area. 
 A child died of nutritional neglect, and case reports noted that case workers from Child Protective 
Services had not been able to check on the child’s family recently due to COVID-19. 
 A man lost his job due to COVID-19, and the stress of unemployment was noted to be a factor in his 
suicide.  
 A family had recently purchased a firearm because they were concerned about their safety during 
COVID-19. Their teenage son was showing the weapon to friends on a video chat and 
unintentionally discharged the weapon consequently dying unintentionally. 
 A man killed his wife and then himself because he falsely feared both had coronavirus (i.e., COVID-
19). 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013. It was modified in November 2020 to expand to all 
manners of death and to add “pandemic or other infectious disease epidemic or outbreak.”  
 
===== Page 106 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  106 | Page  
   
Manner of Death:  All manners. 
 
 
5.4.20 Disaster exposure was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisDisasterExposure 
 
Examples include the victim lost a relative in a tornado the day before the suicide, the victim found out 
their insurance would not cover damage to their business due to a forest fire the week before the 
suicide, and the victim died a week after a nuclear accident where they received a heavy dose of 
radiation that caused numerous physical symptoms.  
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013. It was modified in May 2020 to expand to all manners of 
death and to add “pandemic or other infectious disease epidemic or outbreak.”  
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.4.21 Prior Child Protective Services (CPS) report on the child victim’s household: 
CME/LE_PriorCPSReport 
 
Definition: 
Prior Child Protective Services (CPS) report was filed on the child victim’s household.   
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
This variable refers to CPS contact(s) prior to the current incident and not contact(s) that resulted from 
the current incident. Child is defined as a person younger than 18 years of age. “Household” is defined 
as the residence where the victim lived the majority of the time when the fatal incident occurred. 
Household was chosen as the unit for this question in an attempt to characterize the victim’s 
environment.  
 
 Code “Yes” if source documents indicate the suspect or someone else in the child victim’s household 
was under investigation by CPS for suspected child abuse and/or neglect of the child victim or other 
children in the household.  
 Any report of abuse/neglect should be coded as “Yes” regardless of whether the reports/referrals 
were substantiated. 
 Code “Yes” if a CPS case was opened on other children in the victim’s household prior to this fatal 
event. 
 Code “Yes” if child (a person younger than 18 years of age) had previously been placed in foster 
care, prior to this event. 
 Please note that a CPS report or referral can be in reference to a child or an adult living in the 
household.  
 Code “No” if someone in the household had a prior CPS report on them and the CPS report 
happened in a different household and was not related to the current child victim. For example, a 
CPS report had been made on the child’s mother’s boyfriend previously, pertaining to abuse of his 
other son, and the boyfriend now lives in the child victim’s household.  
===== Page 107 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  107 | Page  
   
 
Also code: “Household known to local authorities” 
 
Note: This variable was added in November 2020. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners. 
 
 
5.4.22 Substance abuse in child victim's household: 
CME/LE_HouseholdSubstanceAbuse 
 
Definition: 
Evidence of substance use in child victim’s household. 
 
Response Options:  
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
Substance use refers to all drugs (including alcohol) that are either non-prescription or being used by 
someone other than the person to whom the prescription was prescribed or being used in a manner 
inconsistent with safe prescribing practices. Child is defined as a person younger than 18 years of age. 
 
 Code “Yes” if anyone else in the household was misusing substances, including other children 
younger than 18 years of age. 
 Code “Yes” if drugs (e.g., heroin, marijuana) or drug paraphernalia (e.g., crack pipe) was found in the 
house. 
 Code “Yes” if there is any indication of substance abuse, misuse, or substance use problems by 
parents, caregivers, other persons living in child victim’s household in investigative reports. A direct 
link to the death is not required. 
 Code “No” if the child victim misused or abused substances, but there was no knowledge of anyone 
else in the household misusing or abusing substances. Child is defined as a person younger than 18 
years of age. 
 
Note: This variable was added in November 2020. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners. 
 
 
5.4.23 Living transition/loss of independent living: CME/LE_LivingTransition 
 
Definition:  
Source documents indicate that the victim recently (i.e., within the past 12 months) transitioned from 
an independent or family living situation (e.g., family home, living on one’s own) to an assisted one, or 
that such a transition was imminent and contributed to the death.   
 
Response Option:  
Circumstance checkbox 
===== Page 108 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  108 | Page  
   
 
Discussion: 
This variable should be endorsed if source documents indicate that the victim recently transitioned into 
an assisted living environment (e.g., nursing home, group home, congregate home, or assisted living 
facility) compared to their typical or previous living environment. This can be endorsed regardless of 
whether the transition was voluntary.  
 
Examples of living transition/loss independent living include:  
 
 The victim recently left an independent or family living environment and transitioned into a group 
home, nursing home, or assisted living facility.  
 The victim recently left an independent living environment (e.g., a living on one’s own) and 
transitioned into living with a family member due to health concerns or to meet other needs for 
care.  
 The use of home health care (e.g., home health aide services, long-term nursing care) was imminent 
or had recently begun due to illness, injury or disability.  
 The victim was subject to conservatorship or guardianship due to aging, illness, injury, or disability 
status.  
 
The following should not be endorsed as a living transition/loss of independent living:  
 
 The victim recently moved from one assisted living environment to a different but similar one (from 
one nursing home to another, one group home to another). 
 The victim recently moved in with a family member or friend, or into a homeless shelter out of 
necessity or due to crisis. This should be coded as “Housing Instability.”                                             
 
Note: This variable was added in November 2020. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners. 
 
 
5.5 Crime and Criminal Activity 
 
 
5.5.1 Precipitated by another crime: CME/LE_PrecipitatedByOtherCrime 
 
Definition:  
The death was precipitated by another serious crime (e.g., drug dealing, robbery) 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
This variable identifies the proportion of violent deaths that are related to other criminal activity, 
specifically felonies (e.g., robbery or drug-trafficking). It uses a somewhat broader definition than that 
used by the SHR system, which only counts felony-related deaths as those that occur while another 
felony is in progress.  
===== Page 109 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  109 | Page  
   
 
Code as “Yes” if the incident occurred as the result of another serious crime. Note that the crime must 
have occured prior to the violent injury and not after it. 
 
Code “Yes”: 
 Serious crimes (such as drug trafficking, robbery, burglary, motor vehicle theft, arson, resisting 
arrest, and witness intimidation/elimination) are felonies. These are crimes that carry a sentence of 
one or more years in prison. 
 A bystander inadvertently killed during the commission of another crime should be coded. 
 A homicide committed in retaliation for the victim cooperating with authorities in identifying the 
suspect as a suspect in another case is properly coded as “Precipitated by another crime.” Also 
endorse “Witness intimidation/elimination” as the nature of the other precipitating crime. 
 If the victim died by suicide after committing a homicide, endorse “Precipitated by another crime.” 
 “PrecipitatedByOtherCrime” must be checked for all incidents involving “Legal Intervention” as the 
abstractor-assigned manner of death.  
 
Code “No”: 
 Criminal activity that was part of the violence that led to the fatal injury, not a separate, 
precipitating crime (e.g., the suspect was assaulting the victim, which led to victims’s death) is not 
another precipitating crime.  
 Misdemeanors such as traffic infractions, shoplifting, petty larceny (e.g., stealing someone’s jacket), 
public drunkenness, and minor assaults (no injury or deadly weapon involved) are not considered 
serious crimes. 
 The simple existence of an additional crime other than the homicide in an incident is not sufficient 
grounds for endorsing “PrecipitatedByOtherCrime,” as homicide suspects are frequently charged 
with more than one crime (e.g., carrying a gun without a permit, destroying evidence). The other 
crime must be a precipitating factor for “PrecipitatedByOtherCrime” to be endorsed. 
 
Note: When endorsing “PrecipitatedByOtherCrime,” you must indicate the “Nature of other 
precipitating crime” and if it was “in progress” at the time of the violent injury. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.5.2 Nature of Other Precipitating Crime Variables 
5.5.2.1 Nature of first other crime: CME/LE_NatureOtherCrime1 
5.5.2.2 Nature of second other crime: CME/LE_NatureOtherCrime2 
 
Definitions: 
 Nature of first other crime: Nature of the first crime that precipitated the incident (Applies only to 
crime-related deaths.) 
 Nature of second other crime: Nature of the second crime that precipitated the incident (Applies 
only to crime-related deaths with more than one precipitating crime.) 
 
Response Options: 
1 Drug trade 
2 Robbery 
===== Page 110 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  110 | Page  
   
3 Burglary 
5 Motor vehicle theft 
6 Arson 
7 Rape, sexual assault 
9 Gambling 
10 Assault, homicide 
11 Witness intimidation/elimination 
66 Other (specify in narrative) 
88 Not applicable 
99 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
For cases in which the incident was precipitated by another serious crime, these two variables identify 
the specific type of crime involved. The information is used to better characterize the types of criminal 
violence that lead to violent death. When multiple crimes are committed, please list crimes in progress 
first and then other crimes. For instance, the victim robs a store earlier in the day and police come to 
arrest him later that day on a tip. The victim shoots at the police and is killed. This should be coded 
“Nature of first crime: Assault, homicide” (i.e., shooting at police) and “Nature of second crime: 
Robbery” (i.e., robbing a store earlier in the day). 
 
Response definitions: 
 Drug trade – The buying, selling, or passing of drugs from one person to another in exchange for 
goods or money. 
 Robbery – Taking, or attempting to take, anything of value from another person or persons by force 
or threat of force or violence. If money or goods are stolen without force or threat of force (e.g., 
thieves stealing equipment from a loading dock), the theft is not a robbery, but larceny, and should 
be coded as “Other.” Note that carjacking is a form of robbery rather than motor vehicle theft, as it 
involves taking by force. 
o Remember, shoplifting and petty larceny (e.g., stealing someone’s jacket) should NOT be 
coded because these are not felonies. 
 Burglary – The unlawful entry into a building or other structure without the owner’s consent and 
with the intent to commit a felony or a theft. 
 Motor vehicle theft – The theft or attempted theft of a motor vehicle includes the stealing of 
automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, motor-scooters, snowmobiles, etc. Does not include taking 
a motor vehicle for temporary use by those persons having lawful access, nor does it include stealing 
motor vehicle parts. Stealing motor vehicle parts without force or the threat of force is larceny and 
should be coded as “Other.” Note that carjacking is a form of robbery rather than motor vehicle 
theft, as it involves taking by force. 
 Arson – To unlawfully and intentionally damage, or attempt to damage, any building, real estate, or 
personal property by fire or incendiary device. An arsonist or building owner burns down a building 
for economic advantage and someone dies in the fire. Victims are considered victims of a criminal 
homicide even if their deaths were not intended. 
o Do not code arson when it is used to cover up a homicide (because the arson was not a 
precipitating event). 
 Rape, sexual assault (i.e., sexual violence±) – Sexual violence is defined as a sexual act that is 
committed or attempted by another person without freely given consent of the victim or against 
someone who is unable to consent or refuse. It includes: forced or alcohol/drug-facilitated 
penetration of a victim; forced or alcohol/drug-facilitated incidents in which the victim was made to 
===== Page 111 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  111 | Page  
   
penetrate a perpetrator or someone else; nonphysically pressured unwanted penetration; 
intentional sexual touching; or non-contact acts of a sexual nature. Sexual violence can also occur 
when a perpetrator forces or coerces a victim to engage in sexual acts with a third party.  
 Gambling – To illegally play games of chance for money or other stakes with the hope of gaining 
something beyond the amount played. This includes dealing, operating, or maintaining any game. 
 Assault/homicide – An unlawful fatal or nonfatal attack by one person upon another. To qualify as a 
serious crime, the assault should be an aggravated assault (one that involves bodily injury or threat 
with a deadly weapon). 
 Witness intimidation/elimination – To prevent a witness from providing information to the 
authorities about a crime either by killing, harming, or removing the witness, or by intentionally 
saying or doing something that would cause the witness to be fearful of providing information. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
± This definition is based on the CDC/National Center for Injury Prevention and Control standard 
definition of Sexual Violence.  Source:  
http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/sv_surveillance_definitions.pdf 
 
 
5.5.3 First crime in progress: CME/LE_OtherCrimeInProgress 
 
Definition:  
The precipitating crime was in progress at the time of the incident. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
An “in-progress crime” is a serious or felony-related crime, as discussed under “Precipitated by another 
crime,” that is being committed or attempted at the time of the incident. 
 
 For deaths that are precipitated by felony criminal activity (as discussed under “Precipitated by 
another crime”), this variable identifies whether the crime listed for “first other crime in progress” 
was in progress when the victim died. 
 The SHR system defines felony-related only in terms of in-progress felonies. Because NVDRS uses a 
broader definition for felony crime-related, this variable can be used to distinguish violent deaths 
where the precipitating felony was in progress (i.e., the SHR definition) or violent deaths that 
occurred after the precipitating felony crime was committed. 
 H omicide examples : 
o A law enforcement officer responded to a robbery and shot the victim when he shot at the 
officer (Note: the precipitating crimes are robbery and assault of the officer and both were 
in progress). “Precipitated by another crime” should be checked for all legal interventions 
unless the shooting was accidental. 
o The victim during a robbery is shot by a bystander. 
o An argument breaks out over a drug deal involving five people. Two are killed and one other 
is shot. 
 S uicide example : 
===== Page 112 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  112 | Page  
   
o The victim assaults a store owner and is pursued by law enforcement. When law 
enforcement corners him in a building, the victim dies by suicide  
 
Also code: Code “Criminal legal problem.” 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.5.4 Stalking: CME/LE_Stalking 
 
Definition:  
Stalking behaviors precipitated the violent incident. Stalking involves a pattern of harassing or 
threatening tactics used by a perpetrator that is both unwanted and causes fear or safety concerns in 
the victim. A person may be considered a stalking victim if they experienced multiple stalking tactics or a 
single stalking tactic multiple times by the same perpetrator±. Examples of stalking tactics include:  
 
 Unwanted phone calls, voice or text messages, hang-ups  
 Unwanted emails, instant messages, messages through social media  
 Unwanted cards, letters, flowers, or presents  
 Watching or following from a distance, spying with a listening device, camera, or global positioning 
system (GPS)  
 Approaching or showing up in places such as the victim’s home, workplace, or school when it was 
unwanted  
 Leaving strange or potentially threatening items for the victim to find  
 Sneaking into victims’ home or car and doing things to scare the victim or let the victim know the 
perpetrator had been there 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
This variable identifies the proportion of violent deaths that are related to stalking or in which stalking 
precipitated a suspect committing violence against a victim. Stalking is not limited to intimate partners 
and can involve stranger, friends, or co-workers. 
 
 Code “Stalking” as “Yes” if there is indication that stalking precipitated the incident. This can occur in 
situations that involved intimate partner violence (e.g., victim had taken out a restraining order, 
because the suspect was stalking her), sexual violence (e.g., suspect had stalked the victim before 
raping and killing her), a serial killing (e.g., suspect stalked victim prior to attack) or bullying. 
 Code “Stalking” as “Yes” if the victim was the stalker (e.g., law enforcement killed the stalker during 
a shootout). 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
Manner of Death: Homicide and legal intervention. 
===== Page 113 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  113 | Page  
   
 
±This definition is based on the CDC/National Center for Injury Prevention and Control standard 
definition of stalking, from the National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey (NISVS) 2010 
Summary Report. Source: http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/nisvs_report2010-a.pdf 
 
 
5.5.5 Stalking was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisStalking 
 
Examples include the victim confronting the stalker the night before being killed or the victim filing a 
restraining order on the stalker the week before being killed. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
Manner of Death: Homicide and legal intervention 
 
 
5.5.6 Prostitution: CME/LE_Prostitution 
 
Definition:  
Prostitution or prostitution-related activities played a precipitating role in the incident. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No, Not Available, Unknown  
1  Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Prostitution includes the prostitutes, pimps, clients, and other persons who are involved in such activity 
(e.g., prostitution ring, sex trafficking). 
 
 Code “Prostitution” as “Yes” if the police or C/ME report indicates that the death resulted, or is 
suspected to have resulted, from prostitution-related activity. 
 This code also applies in incidents where victim(s) appear to have been targeted because they 
engage in prostitution. 
 Do not endorse “Prostitution” if the victim or suspect is a sex worker or pimp, but the death did not 
appear to be related to prostitution activity. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
Manner of Death: Homicide and legal intervention. 
 
 
5.5.7 Prostitution was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisProstitution 
 
Examples include the victim, a prostitute, having a fight with pimp and threatening to leave the day 
before being killed. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013. 
===== Page 114 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  114 | Page  
   
 
Manner of Death: Homicide and legal intervention.  
 
 
5.5.8 Terrorist attack: CME/LE_TerroristAttack 
 
Definition:  
The death resulted from a terrorist attack. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
The victim was injured in a terrorist attack, whether with conventional, chemical, biological, or other 
weapons. 
 
 The NVDRS uses the FBI definition of terrorism: “Injuries resulting from the unlawful use of force or 
violence against persons or property to intimidate or coerce a government, the civilian population, 
or any segment thereof, in furtherance of political or social objectives.” 
 Terrorism is not limited to terrorism by foreign nationals but includes domestic terrorism as well 
(e.g., abortion clinic bombing, anti-war bombing). 
 This code includes those who died while assisting in rescue operations from the attack. 
 Code suicides as “Yes” if the person or people committing the terrorist act died by suicide during or 
immediately after the attack. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.5.9 Gang-related: CME/LE_GangRelated 
 
Definition:  
Definitions for gang-related homicide can vary by law enforcement agency or CME and tend to capture 
deaths that are classified as gang motivated (i.e., motive of the incident was gang-related) or had 
suspected involvement of a gang member (i.e., a gang member was a suspect or victim in the incident). 
This variable captures both types of gang-related deaths reported by agencies. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not available, Unknown 
1 Yes, gang motivated 
2 Yes, suspected gang member involvement 
3 Yes, gang-related not otherwise specified 
4 Organized crime including motorcycle gangs, mafia, and drug cartels 
 
Discussion: 
This variable identifies the proportion of violent deaths that are gang-related. A drop down menu is 
provided to describe the type of gang activity. 
 
===== Page 115 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  115 | Page  
   
Definition of Gang-related: Although the definition of gangs varies across agencies, most definitions 
identify gangs as having a street presence that perpetrate violent street crime such as rape, robbery, 
aggravated assault, gun crimes, and murder. According to the National Gang Center, the following 
criteria are widely accepted among researchers for classifying groups as gangs 
o T he group has three or more members, generally persons 12–24 years of age. 
o Members share an identity, typically linked to a name, and often other symbols. Members 
view themselves as a gang, and they are recognized by others as a gang. The group has 
some permanence and a degree of organization. 
o The group is involved in an elevated level of criminal activity.3 
 The term “street gang” is often used interchangeably with “youth gang” as well as “criminal street 
gang,” with the latter explicitly denoting the element of criminal activity found almost universally in 
gang-related legislation.4 
 Tips on abstracting gang-related deaths 
o Definitions for gang-related homicide can vary by law enforcement agency. It may be 
necessary to ask agencies for clarification on how they define gang-related homicides. Also, 
some law enforcement agencies, especially those with specialized gang units, have 
databases of individual gang members that can be cross-referenced to provide these data. If 
a homicide is reported as “gang-related” and the definition used to make this distinction is 
unknown and not clear from the narrative, please classify as “3” or “gang- related not 
otherwise specified.” 
o Gangs predominantly include persons 12 to 24 years of age but may have members that are 
older or younger and deaths involving members outside the 12 to 24 year age range should 
be coded gang-related. If no information on gang type is provided, assume it is a youth gang. 
o Violent deaths involving adult criminal organizations (i.e., members are predominantly 
adults) or associations such as organized crime, adult motorcycle gangs, or hate or ideology 
groups should not be coded as gang-related because the risk factors and organizations of 
these groups is distinct from street gangs. 
 
3, 4 See http://www.nationalgangcenter.gov/About/FAQ#q1 
 
 Process for categorizing a gang-related death 
Step 1: Identify if the motive of the incident is gang-related (e.g., the death serves to further the 
goals or functions of a gang). These deaths include those occurring from gang rivalry, 
territoriality, or activity. 
 
*** Example incident: The victim (V) was standing on the street when a male suspect (S) 
approached and began questioning the V about his gang affiliation. S then shot V and ran from 
the location. This incident involves gang territoriality and rivalry as a motive. 
 
Step 2: If the incident is not gang-related or it is unknown if it is gang-related, then identify 
whether the incident involved a suspected gang member as either the victim or the suspect. In 
the narrative, describe whether the victim or the suspect was the gang member. 
*** Example incident: The victim had gang-related tattoos. If this is reported, then the victim is 
suspected to be a gang member. 
 
Step 3: Code gang-related not otherwise specified when the incident is described as gang-
related, but the narrative does not provide any detail on what this means. Use this response 
option when the SHR code “juvenile gang killing” is used.  
===== Page 116 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  116 | Page  
   
*** Example incident: The victim was shot during a gang-related shooting. 
 
Note: Before August 2013, this variable only had two response categories, “Yes” or “No, Unknown, Not 
available.” This variable also included both youth gangs. In August 2013, more response options were 
added to better define the type of gang-related activity involved in the incident. 
 
Manner of Death: Homicide and legal intervention. 
 
 
5.6 Manner Specific Circumstances for Homicide 
 
5.6.1 Justifiable self-defense: CME/LE_JustifiableSelfDefense 
 
Definition:  
The homicide was committed by a law enforcement officer in the line of duty or was committed by a 
civilian in legitimate self-defense or in defense of others. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No, Not Available, Unknown  
1  Yes 
 
Discussion:  
This code includes homicides that are committed by a law enforcement officer in the line of duty. It also 
includes homicides by a civilian in self-defense or in defense of others. Only use this code when SHR 
codes the case as a justifiable homicide or LE reports indicate that law enforcement and prosecutors 
have classified the case as a justifiable homicide. It is not enough that the record notes that the civilian 
suspect claims that they acted in self-defense. The LE report must explicitly indicate that the death 
resulted from justifiable homicide (e.g., that the victim was killed by another person who was acting in 
self-defense or that the victim died as a result of legal intervention). The report may use the term 
“justifiable homicide” or some equivalent such as homicide ruled self-defense. Whether the killing was 
truly justifiable is not something that the coder should interpret. 
 
Definition of Self-D efense: The right of a civilian to repel by force, even to the taking of life, in defense of 
his person or property against anyone who attempts by violence or surprise to commit a forcible felony. 
 
E
ssential elements of self-defense are that the civilian does not provoke the difficulty and that there 
must be impending peril without a convenient or reasonable mode of escape. 
 
 Code “Yes” for all legal interventions (i.e., any killing by a law enforcement officer in the line of 
duty).  
 Code “Yes” for a death where the victim attempted to rob the suspect by gunpoint and the suspect 
killed the victim in self-defense and the police report indicates that this is a “justifiable homicide.” 
 
Also code: Code the precipitating event that led to the killing under the “Precipitating crime,” “Nature of 
the crime,” and “Crime in progress” variables, if available. 
 
Manner of Death: Homicide and legal intervention.  
===== Page 117 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  117 | Page  
   
 
 
5.6.2 Victim was a police officer on duty: CME/LE_VictimPoliceOfficerOnDuty 
 
Definition: 
The victim was a law enforcement officer killed in the line of duty. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
At the time of the incident, the victim was a law enforcement officer killed in the line of duty. Also code 
the precipitating event and describe in the narrative. 
 
 This circumstance should not be endorsed for victims in other occupations, such as bail bondsmen, 
private security guards, or emergency responders such as firefighters or emergency medical 
technicians. 
 
Also code: Code the precipitating event that led to the killing under the “Precipitating crime,” “Nature of 
the crime,” and “Crime in progress” variables, if applicable. 
 
Manner of Death: Homicide and legal intervention.  
 
 
5.6.3 Victim was a bystander: CME/LE_Bystander 
 
Definition:  
The victim was a bystander, not the intended target. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
The victim was a bystander and not directly involved in the incident (e.g., pedestrian walking past a gang 
fight, customer in a convenience store at the time of a robbery, or victim struck by stray bullet). 
 
 Also code the precipitating event (e.g., gang-related, robbery). 
 Do not code if the bystander intervened to try to stop the violence and was killed (e.g., customer 
during a robbery was shot while trying to tackle the robber). In this case, code “Victim was 
intervener assisting crime victim.” 
 Do not code if the intended target was unknown or there was a case of mistaken identity. 
 Do not code if a place was targeted even if individual people were not. For instance, a suspect 
returning to the job from which he was recently fired and killed several people would not be coded 
or a suspect shooting into a house. 
 
Also code: Code the precipitating event that led to the killing under the “Precipitating crime,” “Nature of 
===== Page 118 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  118 | Page  
   
the crime,” and “Crime in progress” variables, if available. 
 
Manner of Death: Homicide and legal intervention. 
 
 
5.6.4 Random violence: CME/LE_RandomViolence 
 
Definition: 
The victim was killed by a random act of violence. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
Code as “Yes” if the victim was killed by a random act of violence. A random act is one in which the 
suspect is not concerned with who is being harmed, just that someone is being harmed, such as a 
person who shoots randomly at passing cars from a highway bridge or opens fire in a crowded shopping 
mall. 
 
 Examples of when to code “Yes” for random violence: 
 
o A group of active duty servicemen drove around a neighborhood looking for victims of 
opportunity to shoot and kill at random. Two persons were killed. 
o An 18-year-old suspect encountered a man experiencing homelessness asleep on a bridge, 
went home to retrieve a weapon and came back and killed him because he “thought he 
could get away with it.” 
o A young pregnant woman was killed by two teenage boys throwing heavy rocks off an 
overpass at the cars below. 
o A middle-aged male suspect ambushed a group of teenagers swimming in a local river and 
began shooting into the group at random, killing several victims. 
o A young man armed with a semi-automatic rifle shoots several victims at random in a local 
shopping mall until law enforcement intervenes, killing suspect. 
 
This code should not be  used for cases in which the target such as a place or group of people was chosen 
intentionally (e.g., white supremacist group opened fire in a daycare center that served African 
American children, a suspect who was fired from a workplace attacks co-workers, or any terrorist 
incident). Also, this code should not be used to indicate that a homicide is unsolved, for homicides in 
which the motive is simply unknown, for acts of terrorism, or for bystander deaths. 
 
 Examples of when n ot to code random violence: 
 
o A young male suspect approached the middle-aged male victim’s vehicle at a red light and 
shot and killed the victim in either an attempted carjacking or “road rage” incident.  Victim 
was on the way to pick up his wife from work and is unknown to the suspect.   
o A young victim and suspect were drinking together, when the suspect picked up what he 
reportedly believed was an unloaded gun from the table. He pointed the weapon at the 
victim and fired, shooting the victim in the head. 
===== Page 119 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  119 | Page  
   
o A person delivering newspapers found a 40-year-old man suffering from several gunshot 
wounds in a parking lot. The victim subsequently died of his injuries.  
o A female victim was stabbed to death by her neighbor’s boyfriend (suspect). The neighbor 
would not answer her boyfriend’s persistent knocking because she was with another male.  
The victim answered the door to their shared duplex and was assaulted by the suspect. 
o When visiting his girlfriend, the victim confronted one of the girlfriend’s neighbors (suspect), 
whose dog was barking loudly. The conflict escalated, resulting in a fistfight between the 
two men. The suspect pushed the victim, who fell over the stairwell railing and died from 
injuries sustained in the fall.  
o Officers were investigating a shooting in the area when they located the body of the victim 
suffering from a gunshot wound to the head. No witnesses were identified. The victim is a 
known gang member. This homicide is classified as gang-related. 
 
There are instances where the abstractor must decide if the preponderance of evidence indicates that 
this meets the case definition for random violence versus simply an unknown motive versus a bystander 
shooting.  
 
 Examples of ambiguous cases: 
 
o Officers responded to a report of shots fired. On arrival, they found the victim lying 
unresponsive in his doorway. The victim was shot by an unknown suspect who came to the 
door of his home. Reports indicate that the incident may have been drug-related and was a 
random act of violence. 
o The victim, a 21-year-old white female, and another male were shot in a parking lot of an 
apartment building. The victim died in surgery. Her sister said the victim was “just in the 
wrong place at the wrong time.” 
o The victim died at the scene from a gunshot. Officers found a car with bullet holes in the 
side, where the victim and another passenger suffered gunshot wounds.  A third passenger 
told the police that a man started shooting at their car while they were driving. 
o Two black females, one 15 years old and one 24 years old, died of multiple gunshot wounds.  
The victims were standing along a highway when the suspect pulled up and got out of his 
vehicle firing a shotgun. No other information is given. 
o Officers responded to a call of shots fired. Upon arrival the victim, was located lying in the 
street; he had been shot several times. The victim is known for drug possession and possible 
sales. A suspect has been identified. 
 
Note: This variable was added in 2009. 
 
Manner of Death: Homicide and legal intervention. 
 
 
5.6.5 Victim was intervener assisting crime victim: CME/LE_IntervenerAssistingVictim 
 
Definition:  
An intervener other than a law enforcement officer was killed while assisting a crime victim. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
===== Page 120 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  120 | Page  
   
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
The victim was attempting to assist a crime victim at the time of the incident (e.g., the victim tries to 
stop a fight and is killed, or the victim tries to stop a robbery and is killed). Also code the crime in which 
the victim was intervening (e.g., assault/homicide, robbery, or burglary) and whether it was in progress.  
 
Also code: Code the precipitating event that led to the killing under the “Precipitating crime,” “Nature of 
the crime,” and “Crime in progress” variables, if available. 
 
Manner of Death: Homicide and legal intervention.  
 
 
5.6.6 Victim used weapon: CME/LE_VictimUsedWeapon 
 
Definition: 
The victim used a weapon during the course of the incident. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
Code as “Yes” if the victim was armed with a weapon such as a gun, knife, or blunt instrument and used 
the weapon either to attack or to defend against the suspect or another person during the incident. 
 
 Any object that could be reasonably perceived as life-threatening that is used to threaten, harm, or 
kill another person could be coded as a weapon (e.g., a victim/suspect being pursued by law 
enforcement intentionally used a motor vehicle to hit and kill a law enforcement officer, and then 
was subsequently shot by other officers). 
 Do not endorse for victims who resisted an attacker by kicking, punching, etc., without wielding 
some kind of object as a weapon. 
 Code this variable as “Yes” when a person made an attempt to use a weapon. For example, if a 
person made an attempt to pull a gun but did not actually fire a round. 
 An unloaded, inoperable, or fake weapon (such as a realistic-looking toy) that is used by the victim 
to threaten or defend against attack should be coded as “Yes.” 
 
Manner of Death: Homicide and legal intervention.  
 
 
5.6.7 Mercy killing: CME/LE_MercyKilling 
 
Definition:  
Victim was killed, at the victim’s request, out of compassion in order to end his or her pain or distress. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
===== Page 121 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  121 | Page  
   
 
Discussion:  
The suspect acted to bring about immediate death allegedly in a painless way and based on a clear 
indication that the dying person wished to die because of a terminal or hopeless disease or condition. 
 
 Do not assume that a murder/suicide by a sick, elderly couple is a mercy killing. 
 Code as “Yes” only when there is documentation that the victim wanted to be killed (e.g., left a 
note, told a relative or friend) and the law enforcement are not charging the suspect with an 
intentional homicide. 
 
Manner of Death: Homicide.  
 
 
5.6.8 Hate crime: CME/LE_HateCrime 
 
Definition:  
The homicide was associated with a hate crime. A hate crime is an aggravated assault, arson, burglary, 
criminal homicide, motor vehicle theft, robbery, sexual assault, or crime involving bodily injury in which 
the victim was intentionally selected because of his or her actual or perceived race, gender or gender 
identity, religion, sexual orientation, ethnicity, or disability. Incidents motivated by immigration status 
and national origin should also be coded as hate crimes in NVDRS. Specify the type of hate crime in the 
incident narrative. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
This variable identifies the proportion of deaths that are associated with hate crimes. 
 
Examples: 
 Code “Yes” if a cross was burned in the front yard of the victim's home and several racial slurs were 
spray painted on the home’s exterior. This incident should be coded as a hate crime in NVDRS 
because the victim was targeted because of his/her race. 
 Code “No” if the victim was killed by a suspect in retaliation for using a slur against the suspect. For 
example, if a white male calls a black male a racial slur, and the black male later kills the white male 
in retaliation for having used the racial slur, this would not meet the NVDRS definition of hate crime 
because the victim was not targeted because of his race. Rather, he was targeted for using a racial 
slur. Although this incident may have been racially motivated, it does not meet the NVDRS definition 
for hate crime. 
 
Manner of Death: Homicide.  
 
 
5.6.9 Jealousy (lovers’ triangle): CME/LE_Jealousy 
 
Definition:  
Identifies cases in which jealousy or distress over a current or former intimate partner’s relationship or 
===== Page 122 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  122 | Page  
   
suspected relationship with another person led to the incident.  
 
Response Options:  
0  No, Not Available, Unknown  
1 Yes  
 
Discussion:  
This variable categorizes violence that is directed against any individual that is involved in the love 
triangle, such as the current or former intimate partner or the romantic interest. 
 
Do NOT apply this code to others who may have been present at the time of the incident (e.g., 
bystander, child) and killed but were not part of the love triangle. Someone in the jealous incident has to 
have an intimate relationship with another person in the incident for it to qualify as jealousy. Because 
jealousy is a type of intimate partner violence, always code “intimate partner violence-related” for these 
cases. Code if jealousy is part of the incident, regardless of whom the jealous party is.   
 
Examples to code: 
 Male suspect killed his ex-wife and her new boyfriend because he was angry that she was dating. 
Code “Yes” for both the ex-wife and her new boyfriend. 
 Male suspect killed his girlfriend and his friend because he believed they were romantically involved. 
Code “Yes” for both the girlfriend and his friend. 
 Male suspect killed a man in a bar because he was angry that the victim was flirting with his 
girlfriend. Code “Yes” for the man flirting with the suspect’s girlfriend. 
 
Also code: Code “Intimate partner violence related” as “Yes” because the death was related to an 
immediate or ongoing conflict or violence between current or former intimate partners. 
 
Manner of Death: Homicides and legal interventions.  
 
 
5.6.10 Jealousy (lovers’ triangle) was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisJealousy 
 
Examples include: 
 Suspect killed his wife after finding out the previous day that she was cheating on him. 
 Suspect killed his friend and girlfriend after seeing his friend flirting with his girlfriend during a party 
an hour before the homicides occurred. 
 Suspect killed her husband after coming home and finding him in bed with another woman. 
 Suspect killed his girlfriend after looking at her phone and seeing text messages to another guy that 
he suspected she was seeing. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
Manner of Death: Homicide and legal intervention. 
 
 
5.6.11 Brawl (3 people or more): CME/LE_Brawl 
 
Definition:  
===== Page 123 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  123 | Page  
   
Immediately before the violent death, there was a mutual physical fight between three or more 
individuals which resulted in the death of individuals involved in the fight or bystanders or individuals 
trying to stop the argument. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No, Not Available, Unknown  
1  Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Three or more persons were involved in a mutual, physical fight. The brawl may or may not escalate to 
involve weapons. 
 
 Do not code “Brawl” if the attack was one-sided (e.g., a group beats a single victim to death) or a 
person or people were ambushed (e.g., two people were walking along and jumped by five 
suspects). 
 Do not code as “Brawl” if only two people were fighting; instead code physical fight between two 
people.  
 When a SHR indicates a “brawl,” it may be a physical fight (i.e., physical confrontation among two 
people) or a brawl (i.e., physical confrontation among three or more people) in NVDRS. Please 
review the narrative and code appropriately. 
 
Manner of Death: Homicide and legal intervention.  
 
 
5.6.12 Walk-by Assault: CME/LE_WalkbyAssault 
 
Definition:  
A targeted attack, such as an ambush, where the suspect(s) approached and fled on foot. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No, Not Available, Unknown  
1  Yes 
 
Discussion:  
This variable accounts for deaths where the victim appeared to be jumped or ambushed. The attack 
should have been targeted such that there was no or minimal interaction between suspect and victim 
just prior to incident. Walk-up is the mechanism by which the victim was shot. Also choose a 
precipitating circumstance code to document why the walk-up occurred (e.g., gang-related), if known. 
 
 Do not code walk-up in incidents where the only victim was a bystander (e.g., walk-ups include at 
least one targeted victim). 
 Code deaths that use non-motorized transportation such as a skateboard or bicycle and meet the 
other requirements of the definition as a walk-up shooting 
 Do not code deaths that occur during criminal acts (e.g., store employee surprises and shoots an 
armed robber or law enforcement pursue and kill a suspect fleeing a burglary). 
 
Examples: 
 Code “Yes”: 
===== Page 124 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  124 | Page  
   
o If the victim was shot right as they left their house and the suspect fled the scene on foot. 
o If the two victims were walking home and shot by two opposing gang members who were 
hiding in alley. 
o If two suspects walked up to a house opened fire killing the victim and then fled the scene. 
o If a suspect killed his ex-wife by hiding in the bushes, then shooting her when she returned 
from work. 
 Code “No”: 
o If the victim and the suspect were arguing before the suspect pulled out a gun and shot the 
victim. 
o If a fight broke out during a drug deal and the victim was killed. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
Manner of Death: Homicide. 
 
 
5.6.13 Drive-by shooting: CME/LE_DrivebyShooting 
 
Definition:  
Victim was killed in shooting where the suspect or group of suspects drives near the victim or target and 
shoots while driving or uses a car to approach and flee the scene of a homicide but steps out of the car 
just long enough to use a weapon. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No, Not Available, Unknown  
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Drive-by shootings must involve a motorized vehicle, such as a car, motorcycle, truck, and does not 
include other modes of transportation, such as bicycles, scooters, or skateboards. For all incidents, note 
the mode of transportation and the precipitating circumstance in the narrative.  
 
Also code: Code “Bystander” if the victim was a bystander and not the intended victim. 
 
Note: This variable was added in 2009. 
 
Manner of Death: Homicide. 
 
 
5.6.14 Drug involvement: CME/LE_DrugInvolvement 
 
Definition:  
Drug dealing, drug trade, or drug use is suspected to have played a role in precipitating the incident. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
===== Page 125 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  125 | Page  
   
Discussion:  
Code “Drug involvement” as “Yes” if the death was related to illegally trafficking a controlled substance 
(e.g., drug deal gone bad, drug market turf battle, theft of drugs or money from a dealer during a drug 
deal, etc.) or a drug habit (e.g., addict committing robbery to obtain money for drugs, arguments over 
drugs). 
 
 This variable can be coded based on suspicion of drug-relatedness (e.g., law enforcement suspected 
drugs were involved). 
 Code “Drug involvement” as “Yes” if there is evidence of drug involvement (e.g., Victim’s body was 
found in a crack house, the victim had a substantial amount of illicit drugs on his or her person at 
the time of death), and there is not any other indication of the incident not being related to drugs. 
 Drugs or drug paraphernalia found on the victim’s body should not be used to automatically code 
this variable unless other information suggests the victim was dealing drugs or had just bought 
drugs. 
 Illicit drugs found elsewhere in the victim’s home should NOT trigger coding this circumstance (e.g., 
victim was shot on porch in drive-by shooting and small amounts of illicit drugs were found in 
bedroom) unless the source documents indicate that the illicit drugs were involved in the death 
(e.g., attempted theft of drugs, argument over drugs, or victim or suspect selling drugs). 
 
Manner of Death: Homicide and legal intervention.  
 
 
5.6.15 Caregiver use of corporal punishment contributed to the death of the child victim:    
CME/LE_CorporalPunishment 
 
Definition:  
Corporal punishment, which is also known as physical punishment, contributed to the death of the child 
victim. Corporal punishment is used to describe acts of physical punishment (e.g., spanking, slapping, 
pinching, hitting), with or without an implement (e.g., belt, broom, stick), that are intended to punish or 
discipline a child and cause some degree of pain or discomfort. A child is defined as a person younger 
than 18 years of age. Most instances where a child is injured while being physically punished are due to 
the punishment escalating to physical abuse or in some instances, death. 
 
Corporal punishment refers specifically to a form of child discipline, used by a caregiver, with the intent 
to punish perceived child misbehavior. The term “caregiver” refers to anyone serving in a caregiving role 
and who is responsible for the care and rearing of children or who is temporarily supervising or helping 
to supervise the child victim (e.g., parent, mother’s boyfriend, babysitter, older sibling, or cousin acting 
as babysitter/helper).  
 
Response Options:  
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
 The suspect may be a caregiver of any age, including a minor (i.e., person younger than 18 years of 
age, but is legally able to serve as a caregiver per state statute or current guidance within the state). 
The legal age at which a person can serve as a caregiver/babysitter for a minor child varies by state. 
===== Page 126 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  126 | Page  
   
For example, in Illinois, a person must be at least 14 years of age to be left alone to serve as a 
caregiver/ babysitter of a minor, while in Texas, there is no legal minimum age for babysitting. Data 
abstractors should refer to their state statutes or current guidance within their state to determine if 
the suspect was legally able to serve as a caregiver/babysitter during the time of the fatal incident. 
 Do not code “Yes” if victim is 18 years of age or older at the time of the fatal incident. 
 Code “Yes” if the caregiver or other person temporarily supervising the child victim used corporal 
punishment (with the intent to correct perceived or actual disobedience or misbehavior), with or 
without an implement in a way that initiated the chain of events leading to the child’s death.   
 Code “Yes” if implement (e.g., belt, broom, stick) was used in the fatal event, AND the source 
documents indicate that the suspect intended to discipline the child victim. This code does not apply 
to instances in which the implement was the weapon in an incident that clearly started with 
homicidal intent rather than corporal punishment. 
 Do not code “Yes” if the victim died as a result of shaken baby syndrome but had no known 
evidence of corporal punishment precipitating their death, as indicated in the source documents. 
Caregiver use of corporal punishment is considered legal in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, 
and Puerto Rico in the U.S. However, shaken baby syndrome, which may also be known as abusive 
head trauma, is considered as a form of child physical abuse, which is illegal in the U.S., because it 
violates laws and policies designed to protect children. Shaken baby syndrome is largely triggered by 
developmentally normative crying in infants, although victims can be older. Although crying can be 
the perceived child misbehavior for which a child is physically punished for, and a caregiver may use 
shaking as a form of discipline, this variable is designed to be distinct from the existing shaken baby 
syndrome “15 – Weapon type (Shaking [i.e., shaken baby syndrome]).  
 Code “No” if source documents indicate the suspect used corporal punishment with homicidal 
intent. If the intent was to commit homicide, then this would NOT be considered corporal 
punishment, but it would be considered child physical abuse.  
When this vaiable is endorsed, the narrative should include information indicating that the suspect 
intended to discipline the child for perceived or actual child “misbehavior.” Further, when available, the 
narrative should include information on the reason the child was being disciplined (e.g., child was 
physically punished for throwing a temper tantrum, soiling clothes, having a potty training-related 
accident, etc.).  
 
Also Code:  
 Code “Abuse/neglect led to death” if “CorporalPunishment” is endorsed as “Yes.” 
 Code “History of abuse or neglect as a child” if the victim had a history of maltreatment by the 
suspect or other(s).  
 Code “History of abuse of victim by this suspect: AbuseHistory” if the suspect in this incident had 
previously abused the child victim. 
 Code “This suspect was caregiver for the victim: CareGiver” since the suspect was a caregiver for the 
victim. 
 
Note: This variable was added in November 2020. 
 
Manner of Death: Homicide. 
 
 
===== Page 127 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  127 | Page  
   
5.7 Manner Specific Circumstances for Suicide 
 
 
5.7.1 History of suicidal thoughts or plans: CME/LE_SuicideThoughtHistory 
 
Definition:  
Victim had a history of suicidal thoughts or plans. Disclosure of suicidal thoughts or plan can be verbal, 
written or electronic. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Use this code for victims who have at any time in their life expressed suicidal thoughts or plans. The 
victim may or may not have disclosed suicidal thoughts and/or plans close to the time of the suicide. 
 
 Suicidal ideation can be expressed directly (e.g., “I am thinking of killing myself”) or indirectly (e.g., “I 
don’t know if I want to go on living”). 
 When the timing is unclear (e.g., timing not mentioned) or if the suicidal thoughts were described as 
occurring in the “past,” “a few years ago,” or “just,” history of suicidal thoughts should be “Yes.” 
 Also code “Recently disclosed suicidal thoughts/plans” in addition to this item, if the victim disclosed 
suicidal thoughts and/or plans close to the time (within one month) of the suicide.”   
 Code “No” for previous suicide attempts if the victim did not disclose suicidal thoughts or plans. 
Previous suicide attempts should be coded as “History of Suicide Attempts.” 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.2 History of non-suicidal self-injury/self-harm: CME/LE_HistorySelfHarm  
 
Definition:  
Victim had a history of intentionally inflicting pain or injuring one’s own body without the conscious 
intent of dying by suicide.  
 
Response Options:  
0  No, Not Available, Unknown  
1  Yes 
 
Discussion:  
 Use this code for victims who have had a history of engaging in deliberate self-harm/self-mutilative 
behaviors without intent to die by suicide.   
 Examples of self-injurious behaviors include: cutting, carving, biting, or severely scratching skin; 
burning or scalding oneself; hitting or banging head; punching things or throwing body against walls 
and hard object; inserting objects into skin or body openings; purposely breaking bones; 
===== Page 128 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  128 | Page  
   
intentionally preventing wounds from healing; and swallowing poisonous substances (e.g. bleach or 
detergent) or inappropriate objects. Although these self-injurious behaviors differ in their potential 
lethality, intent (suicidal vs. non-suicidal, as best can be determined from the V’s records) is the best 
determinant of whether past behaviors meet criteria for this variable vs. history of suicide attempts.  
 Do not code self-injurious behaviors that include behaviors such as driving recklessly, substance use 
(e.g. binge drinking, taking too many drugs), having unsafe sex, behaviors associated with an eating 
disorder, tattooing, or body piercings with jewelry.  
 Do not code if there is an indication that the self-injurious behavior was related to a suicide attempt 
(in which case, code as history of suicide attempt). 
 There may be cases in which it is difficult to determine if self-injurious wounds were related to a 
previous suicide attempt or if it was an instance of a non-suicidal self-injurious behavior (e.g., 
autopsy report may indicate several, healed cutting wounds on decedent’s arms). In these cases 
where the victim’s intent to die is unclear or ambiguous, we recommend endorsing this variable.  
 
Note: This variable was added in November 2020. 
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths. 
 
 
5.7.3 History of suicide attempts: CME/LE_SuicideAttemptHistory 
 
Definition: 
Victim has a history of attempting suicide before the fatal incident. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Code as “Yes” if the victim was known to have made previous suicide attempts before the fatal incident, 
regardless of the severity of those attempts or whether any attempts resulted in injury. Per the CDC 
uniform definition of suicide attempt± (A non-fatal, self-directed, potentially injurious behavior with any 
intent to die as a result of the behavior; which may or may not result in injury), the victim must engage 
in a potentially injurious behavior. A potentially injurious behavior is one which in and of itself has the 
ability to cause injury and/or death. 
 Russian roulette: pulling the trigger on a firearm is considered potentially injurious, regardless of 
whether the weapon fires when the victim pulled the trigger. Code as “Yes.” 
 Swallowing a lethal dose of pills then calling 911 is considered potentially injurious. Code as “Yes.” 
 If the V  made a suicidal gesture (placed ligature around their neck, stood on a bridge preparing to 
jump, held a gun to his head) but was stopped before taking action (e.g., did not pull the trigger 
after talking to family or pulled from bridge by law enforcement before jumping), consider this 
potentially injurious behavior a suicide attempt. Code as “Yes.” 
 
Evidence of a history of suicide attempts includes self-report and report or documentation from others 
including family, friends, and health professionals. 
 
± Reference: Crosby AE, Ortega L, Melanson C. Self-directed Violence Surveillance: Uniform Definitions 
===== Page 129 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  129 | Page  
   
and Recommended Data Elements, Version 1.0. Atlanta (GA): Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control; 2011 
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.4 Recent Disclosed Suicidal Thoughts or Intent to Die by Suicide: 
CME/LE_SuicideIntentDisclosed 
 
Definition: Victim disclosed to another person their thoughts and/or plans to die by suicide within the 
last month. Disclosure of suicidal thoughts or plan can be verbal, written or electronic. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
This variable helps identifies suicides for which opportunities to intervene and prevent the death may 
have been present near the time of the suicide. It is also useful for exploring the association between 
stated intent and actual death. 
 
 Code as “Yes” if the victim had disclosed suicidal thoughts or plans to another person recently or 
within the last month, whether explicitly (e.g., “I have been thinking about suicide lately” or “I plan 
to go to my cabin with my gun and never come back”) or indirectly (e.g., “I know how to put a 
permanent end to this pain”). Include in the narrative any available details about whom the intent 
was disclosed to, how long before the death the intent was disclosed, and what was said during the 
disclosure. 
 Code as “Yes” if there was opportunity to intervene between the time the person disclosed intent 
and the injury event. 
o Do not code this variable if the victim disclosed the intention to kill him or herself only at the 
moment of the suicide (i.e., when there was no opportunity to intervene to stop the 
suicide). For instance, sending an email or text message right before the victim shot herself. 
This would be considered a suicide note. 
 Do not endorse this variable if the victim had talked about suicide sometime in the distant past but 
had not recently disclosed a current intent to die by suicide to anyone. This would be coded as 
“History of disclosed suicidal thoughts/plans”. 
 A separate suicide attempt by the victim within a month of the suicide should be coded as “Yes.” In 
this case, “History of suicide attempts” should also be coded, “Yes.” 
 The timing of when the victim disclosed the suicidal intent may be unclear (e.g., recently or some 
time ago) or not mentioned. Please use the following rules to code these cases: 
o Code “Yes” if the narrative states the victim “just” or “recently” told someone about his 
suicidal intent. 
o If the record indicates disclosure of intent, but is unclear about the timeframe (i.e., does not 
mention it all), code as “Yes.” 
o LE or C/ME reports may be unclear about timing of the disclosure. If the record indicates 
disclosure of intent in the past, but states that there was no disclosure for the current 
incident, do not code, instead use the “History of suicidal thoughts/plan/attempts.” 
o If the victim disclosed suicidal intent “a long time ago,” “more than a month ago,” or in the 
===== Page 130 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  130 | Page  
   
“past,” code as “No” and code “History of disclosed suicidal thought/plans/actions.” 
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.5 Disclosed to whom: CME/LE_DisclosedIntentToWhom 
 
Definition:  
Person to whom victim recently disclosed suicidal thoughts and/or plans to die by suicide (i.e., coded 
“Recent Disclosed Suicidal Thought and/or Plan.” 
 
Response Options: 
Available as checkboxes (select all that apply). 
0 No, Not available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
[ ] Previous or current intimate partner 
[ ] Other family member 
[ ] Health care worker 
[ ] Friend/colleague 
[ ] Neighbor 
[ ] Other disclosure to person(s) via social media or other electronic means 
[ ] Other (If other, specify in textbox.) 
[ ] Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
This variable is intended to capture the one or multiple persons to whom victim recently disclosed 
suicidal thoughts and/or plans to die by suicide.  
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013. It was modified in November 2020 to add “Other 
disclosure to person(s) via social media or other electronic means.” It was later modified in August 2021 
to include checkbox response options to allow abstractors to select multiple response options for this 
variable. 
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.6 Left a suicide note: CME/LE_SuicideNote 
 
Definition: 
Victim left a suicide note (or other recorded communication). Note can be written or electronic. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
 A will or folder of financial papers near the victim does not constitute a suicide note. 
===== Page 131 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  131 | Page  
   
 If the record states the person left a note, you can infer it was a suicide note in the absence of 
information indicating that the note had some other purpose. 
 A suicide note can be any essentially durable message; it does not have to be on a piece of paper. 
Emails, text messages, voice mail, or writing on any object (such as a wall or table) all qualify. Phone 
calls do not qualify, as they are not considered durable (even 911 calls, because the decedent may 
or may not have known they were being recorded). 
 A suicide note does not have to communicate that the person wants or intends to die. Notes that 
are written to warn others at the scene of the fatal injury that conditions may be hazardous or 
disturbing may be included (e.g., “Call 911, do not enter garage” or “Carbon monoxide – do not 
enter”).  
 A text or electronic message sent right before the suicide occurred should be labeled a suicide note, 
if there was no time between the sending/receipt of the message and the suicide. If there was time 
to intervene, this should be coded as “disclosed suicidal thought or intent.” If the contents of the 
suicide note are included or described in your source documents, summarizing this information in 
the narrative is helpful to provide further context for the incident. If you choose to do so, do not 
include verbatim text and do not include identifying information, but a summary of what was said. 
This information may be helpful in noting themes related to the suicide that go beyond standard 
NVDRS circumstances and are one of the only means of accessing the decedents’ thoughts about 
their suicide more directly. 
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths. 
 
 
5.7.7 Contributing criminal legal problem: CME/LE_RecentCriminalLegalProblem 
 
Definition:  
Criminal legal problem(s) appear to have contributed to the death 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Code as “Yes” if at the time of the incident the victim was facing criminal legal problems (recent or 
impending arrest, law enforcement pursuit, impending criminal court date, etc.), and this appears to 
have contributed to the death. Code military crimes, such as Absent Without Leave, as “Yes.” 
 
 Criminal legal problems, as opposed to civil legal problems, are those resulting from conduct 
considered as harmful to society as a whole that it is prohibited by statute and prosecuted by the 
government. Driving while intoxicated offenses should be considered a criminal offense. 
 Committing a crime alone is not sufficient basis for endorsing this variable; there must be evidence 
of negative legal or law enforcement consequences (e.g., about to enter jail, facing a court date, on 
the run from law enforcement) that appear to be associated with the death. 
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.8 Contributing criminal legal problem was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisCriminal 
===== Page 132 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  132 | Page  
   
 
Examples include the victim being upset about having to start a prison term for robbery in a week, a 
victim despondent over a Driving While Intoxicated court date scheduled for a day after the suicide, or a 
criminal who dies by suicide when law enforcement appears at their house to arrest them for an assault. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.9 Civil legal problems: CME/LE_LegalProblemOther 
 
Definition:  
Civil legal (non-criminal) problem(s) appear to have contributed to the death 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Code as “Yes,” if at the time of the incident the victim was facing civil legal problems, such as a divorce, 
custody dispute, civil lawsuit, or legal problems that were unspecified as either criminal or civil, and 
these problems appear to have contributed to the death.  
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.10 Civil legal problems were crisis: CME/LE_CrisisCivilLegal  
 
Examples include the victim being upset because they lost custody of their child the day before the 
suicide or the victim losing a civil lawsuit the week before the suicide. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013. 
 
 Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.11 Contributing physical health problem: CME/LE_PhysicalHealthProblem 
 
Definition:  
Victim’s physical health problem(s) appear to have contributed to the death 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
===== Page 133 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  133 | Page  
   
The victim was experiencing physical health problems (e.g., terminal disease, debilitating condition, 
chronic pain) that were relevant to the event. 
 
 Endorse this variable only if a health problem is noted as contributing to the death (e.g., despondent 
over recent diagnosis of cancer or complained that he could not live with the pain associated with a 
condition). 
 The simple mention of a health problem should not trigger coding the death as health-related. C/ME 
reports generally include the decedent’s existing medical problems (e.g., diabetes, asthma, cancer). 
Do not endorse this variable based only on a list of conditions. 
 “Debilitating” conditions would leave the victim confined to bed, oxygen dependent, or requiring 
basic daily care from a third party. 
 Health conditions are coded from the perspective of the victim. If the victim believed him- or herself 
to be suffering from a physical health problem, and this belief was contributory to the death, it does 
not matter if any particular health problem was ever treated, diagnosed, or even existed. For 
instance, code “Yes” if the victim only suspected he might have AIDS and died by suicide before he 
received his test results. 
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.12 Contributing physical health problem was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisPhysicalHealth 
 
Examples include the victim being despondent over being diagnosed with cancer two days before the 
suicide, a victim finding out the day before the suicide that their condition got significantly worse, or a 
victim just went bankrupt due to treatment for a chronic mental illness the day before the suicide. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.13 Type of physical health problem: CME/LE_TypePhysicalHealthProblem  
 
Definition:  
Type(s) of physical health problem(s) contributing to the death. 
 
Response Options:  
Available as checkboxes (select all that apply). 
0 No, Not available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
[ ] Terminal illness or condition 
[ ] Other illness or condition 
[ ] Unknown type of illness or condition 
 
[ ] Chronic pain 
[ ] Acute pain 
[ ] Pain of unknown duration 
===== Page 134 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  134 | Page  
   
 
Type of illness, condition, or pain: (free text) 
 
Discussion:  
This variable is intended to capture the type(s) of physical health problem(s) the victim was experiencing 
that contributed to the death. This variable is to be endorsed if “Contributing physical health problem” is 
“Yes.” Only code for the health problem(s) that is noted as contributing to the death. C/ME reports 
generally include the decedent’s existing medical conditions regardless of whether or not the 
condition(s) contributed to the death. Thus, do not endorse this variable based simply on a list of 
conditions. 
 
Discussion regarding illness or condition checkboxes: 
 Terminal illness or condition: Terminal illness is defined as an active and progressive illness for 
which there is no cure and the prognosis is fatal. The mere presence of an illness or condition that 
can be terminal (e.g., cancer, AIDS) does not mean this variable should automatically be coded 
unless there is evidence that the illness or condition was terminal for the decedent. If the illness or 
condition is unknown/not specified in the source documents, but there is language suggesting that it 
was terminal (e.g., “decedent was dying from an illness”), code this variable. 
 Other illness or condition: If the name or cause of the illness or condition is known and it is not 
terminal, code this variable. For example, if the decedent was suffering from the effects of a recent 
stroke that contributed to his decision to die by suicide, code this variable. Physical health problems 
that may not intrinsically be thought of as illnesses or conditions, such as amputations and physical 
disability, can be coded here. Mental illness or mental disability should not be captured here. They 
should be captured elsewhere, under “Current diagnosed mental health problem” and “Mental 
Health Diagnosis” variables. 
 U nknown type of illness or condition should be coded when the name or cause of the illness or 
condition is not known or described in investigative reports (e.g., decedent “had been ill” or 
“suffering from an unspecified illness.”) 
Discussion regarding pain checkboxes: 
 Chronic pain is defined as pain lasting more than 3 months.  
 Acute pain is defined as pain lasting 3 or fewer months. If the decedent is reported as “recently” 
experiencing pain or was “just injured and treated for pain,” code as “Acute pain.”  
 Pain of unknown duration should be coded if the duration of the pain is unclear. 
 There may be instances in which a decedent with chronic pain had been living with a relatively 
stable and adequately controlled level of baseline pain but experienced a recent, transitory increase 
in pain (which may be referred to as flare-up pain or break-through pain). This increase in pain could 
have been caused by changes in an underlying disease, including treatment, or changes in activity 
level. Code these cases as “Chronic pain.” For example, if a decedent had been living with chronic 
pain from colon cancer and had recently experienced an increase in pain as a result of metastases 
(or spread of cancer) to his bones, code “Chronic pain.” 
General discussion: 
 The simple mention of a health problem should not trigger coding these variables. For example, a 
C/ME report may indicate that the decedent had diabetes, asthma, and pancreatic cancer. If the 
===== Page 135 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  135 | Page  
   
pancreatic cancer was noted to be terminal and had been causing pain and distress for the decedent 
in the month before his death, endorse “Terminal illness” and “Acute pain.” 
 A decedent may have been experiencing multiple illnesses and pain conditions at the same time; 
thus, all should be endorsed. For example, if a decedent had been experiencing pain for more than 3 
months as a result of terminal colon cancer and had broken his hip from a fall 2 weeks prior, 
resulting in hip pain, and all contributed to his decision to die by suicide, select “Terminal illness” 
(for terminal colon cancer, “Other illness or condition” (for hip fracture), “Chronic pain” (for colon 
cancer pain lasting more than 3 months), and “Acute pain” (for pain from hip fracture lasting 2 
weeks).   
 Type of illness, condition, or pain: Type the name of the illness or type of pain condition in the free 
text field. If the decedent had more than one illness or pain condition, list each illness/condition 
followed by the type of illness or pain that was marked in parentheses. Using the same example as 
the bullet point above, if a decedent had been experiencing pain for more than 3 months as a result 
of terminal colon cancer and had broken his hip from a fall 2 weeks prior, resulting in hip pain, type: 
“colon cancer (terminal illness, chronic pain), hip fracture (other illness or condition, acute pain).”  
 Health conditions can also be coded from the perspective of the victim. If the victim believed him- or 
herself to be suffering from a physical health problem, and this belief was contributory to the death, 
it does not matter if any particular health problem was ever treated, diagnosed, or even existed. For 
instance, code this variable if the victim only suspected he was HIV positive and died by suicide 
before he received his test results (in this example, code “Other illness or condition”). 
Note: This variable was added in August 2021.  
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths. 
 
 
5.7.14 Job problem: CME/LE_JobProblem 
 
Definition: 
Job problem(s) appear to have contributed to the death. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Code “Job problem” as “Yes” if at the time of the incident the victim was either experiencing a problem 
at work (such as tensions with a co-worker, poor performance reviews, increased pressure, feared 
layoff) or was having a problem with joblessness (e.g., recently laid off, having difficulty finding a job), 
and this appears to have contributed to the death. 
 
 Simply being unemployed is not sufficient—there must be an indication that the victim was 
experiencing difficulty finding or keeping a job. 
 Code “Yes” if the victim experienced a recent major job problem such as being fired from their job, 
being demoted, or having a serious conflict with his/her boss. 
 Code “No” if a person left his or her job as part of a suicide plan (e.g., “Victim left work four days ago 
===== Page 136 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  136 | Page  
   
and checked into a hotel; the body was found after co-workers contacted the victim’s family to try 
to locate him”). 
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.15 Job problem was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisJob 
 
Examples include the victim being fired from work two days before the suicide, being upset about being 
scheduled to lose unemployment benefits the day after the suicide and being turned down for a job the 
day before the suicide. 
 
Note: This variable was added in July 2013.  
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths. 
 
 
5.7.16 Financial problem: CME/LE_FinancialProblem 
 
Definition:  
Financial problems appear to have contributed to the death 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Code as “Yes” if at the time of the incident the victim was experiencing a problem such as bankruptcy, 
overwhelming debts, or foreclosure of a home or business, and this appears to have contributed to the 
death. Inclusion in the investigative reports is sufficient to code “Yes.” 
 
Also code: “Eviction or loss of housing,” if applicable.  
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.17 Financial problem was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisFinancial 
 
Examples include the victim had a bankruptcy hearing a week after the date of their death, the victim 
had their car re-possessed the day before the suicide, and the victim was to be evicted from their house 
on the day of their death due to their inability to pay the mortgage (Note: Also, should code 
“Eviction/foreclosure”). 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
===== Page 137 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  137 | Page  
   
 
5.7.18 School problem: CME/LE_SchoolProblem 
 
Definition:  
Problems at or related to school appear to have contributed to the death. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
 Code “Yes” if at the time of the incident the victim was experiencing a problem such as poor grades, 
difficulty with a teacher, bullying, social exclusion at school, school detention/suspension, or 
performance pressures, and this appears to have contributed to the death. 
 Code “No” if the victim was only noted as having low grades, but no specific problem was cited (e.g., 
received a failing grade recently) or victim was not described as being upset about the low grades. 
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.19 School problem was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisSchool 
 
Examples include the victim failing a test the day before the suicide, the victim having a suspension 
hearing scheduled the day after the suicide, and the victim was beat-up the week before and was afraid 
to go to school. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths. 
 
 
5.7.20 Eviction or loss of housing: CME/LE_EvictionOrLossOfHome 
 
Definition:  
A recent eviction or other loss of the victim’s housing, or the threat of it, appears to have contributed to 
the death. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Code as “Yes” if at the time of the incident the victim had recently been, was in the process of being 
evicted or foreclosed on, or was confronted with an eviction, foreclosure, or other loss of housing (e.g., 
kicked of house by a relative), and this appears to have contributed to the death. Inclusion in the 
investigative reports is sufficient to code “Yes.” 
 
Also code: If the victim’s home was lost due to Disaster, consider coding “DisasterExposure.” 
===== Page 138 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  138 | Page  
   
 
Note: This variable was added in 2009. 
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.21 Eviction or loss of home was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisEviction 
 
Examples includes the victim was to be evicted from their apartment the day after the suicide, a mother 
kicked her son out of the house due to his drug problem the day before the suicide, and the victim 
received a final foreclosure notice two days before the suicide. 
 
Note: This variable was added in July 2013.   
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths. 
 
 
5.7.22 Suicide of friend or family contributed to death: CME/LE_RecentSuicideFriendFamily 
 
Definition:  
Suicide of a family member or friend appears to have contributed to the death. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
There is no time limit for when the suicide of the family or friend occurred, except that it occurred 
during the victim’s lifetime and that it is noted to have contributed to the victim’s death. In the 
narrative, note the source of this information, the relationship to the family member or friend, and the 
time frame (e.g., last month). 
 
 Code “Yes” if at the time of the incident the victim was distraught over or reacting to a suicide of a 
friend or family member. 
 Code “Yes” if the victim was distraught over an anniversary of the suicide. 
 
Also code: Consider coding “Anniversary of traumatic event” if applicable. 
 
Note: Before August 2013, abstractors only coded a suicide of friend or family member that occurred 
within five years of the decedent’s death. Beginning in August 2013, abstractors could code cases where 
the death occurred more than five years before the victim’s suicide as long as the deaths were perceived 
as contributing to the suicide. 
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.23 Suicide of friend or family was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisRecSuicideFriendFamily 
===== Page 139 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  139 | Page  
   
 
Examples include the victim being upset or distraught over a suicide of the friend or family member 
occurring within two weeks of his or her death. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.7.24 Other death of friend or family:  CME/LE_DeathFriendOrFamilyOther 
 
Definition:  
Death of a family member or friend due to something other than suicide appears to have contributed to 
the death. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
Code “Yes” if at the time of the incident the victim was distraught over or reacting to a death of a friend 
or family member. The death could have been recent or many years ago. 
 
 If a source document indicates that the victim’s suicide took place on the anniversary of the death of 
a friend or family member, code this variable “Yes.” 
 If the death happened long before the incident, only endorse if the victim was very upset about the 
incident because of an anniversary or some other factor that made their feelings about the death 
stronger. 
 
Also code: Code “Anniversary of traumatic event,” if applicable. 
 
Note: Before August 2013, abstractors only coded a suicide of friend or family member that occurred 
within five years of the decedent’s death. Beginning in August 2013, abstractors could code cases where 
the death occurred more than five years before the victim’s suicide as long as the deaths were perceived 
as contributing to the suicide. 
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths. 
 
 
5.7.25 Other death of friend or family was crisis: CME/LE_CrisisDeathFriendOrFamilyOth 
 
Discussion: 
Examples include the victim being upset over the death of a parent who died four days before the 
suicide or the victim being distraught on the year anniversary of the death of their spouse (Note: Also 
code “Anniversary of traumatic event”). 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
===== Page 140 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  140 | Page  
   
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths. 
 
 
5.7.26 Anniversary of a traumatic event: CME/LE_TraumaticAnniversary  
 
Definition:  
Incident occurred on or near the anniversary of a traumatic event in the victim’s life and was perceived 
as a contributing factor. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
This variable identifies deaths that may be related to the anniversary of a traumatic experience in the 
victim’s life, such as the death of a relative or friend. Other traumatic experiences include: sexual or 
physical victimization, community violence, mass shooting/killings, natural disasters, etc.  
 Code as “Yes” if the incident occurred on or near the date of a traumatic event in the victim’s life, 
regardless of how far in the past the event was, as long as the incident was perceived as a 
contributing factor to the death. Indicate the nature of the event in the incident narrative. 
 
Note: This variable was added in 2009.  
 
Manner of Death: Suicide and undetermined deaths.  
 
 
5.8 Manner Specific Circumstances for Unintentional Firearm Deaths 
 
This section relates to deaths resulting from a penetrating injury or gunshot wound from a weapon that 
uses a powder charge to fire a projectile when there was a preponderance of evidence that the shooting 
was not intentionally directed at the victim. Other types of unintentional deaths (e.g., accidental drug 
overdose) are not collected by NVDRS core modules. 
 
 
5.8.1 Hunting: CME/LE_Hunting 
 
Definition:  
The shooter or victim was hunting or on a hunting trip. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
 Include any incident that occurs after leaving home and before returning home from hunting. 
 The shooting itself need not have been during an active hunt to be considered hunting-related. For 
example, a hunter who has finished hunting and accidentally shoots himself while loading his rifle in 
the truck for the return trip home is considered a hunting accident. 
===== Page 141 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  141 | Page  
   
 If an injury occurs before or after the hunting trip (e.g., while cleaning a gun in preparation for a 
hunting trip), the incident should not be coded as hunting-related. 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
 
5.8.2 Target Shooting: CME/LE_TargetShooting 
 
Definition:  
The shooter was aiming for a target and unintentionally hit a person. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Target shooting can occur either in the setting of a formal shooting range or in an informal “backyard” 
setting (e.g., teenagers shooting at signposts on a fence accidentally hits a person). 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
 
5.8.3 Self-defensive shooting: CME/LE_SelfDefense 
 
Definition:  
Victim was attempting to defend him or herself with a gun and inadvertently shot him or herself. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Endorse only if the shooting was self-inflicted. If the victim is shooting at law enforcement officers who 
are trying to arrest him/her when they accidentally shoot himself/herself, this circumstance be coded 
“No.” Please put this information in the narrative. 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
 
5.8.4 Celebratory firing: CME/LE_CelebratoryFiring 
 
Definition:  
The shooter was firing the gun in a celebratory manner with no intention of threatening or endangering 
others (e.g., revelers on New Year’s Eve shooting their guns in the air at midnight). 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
===== Page 142 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  142 | Page  
   
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Firing warning shots in the air (e.g., to break up a fight) should not be coded as celebratory if the shot 
unintentionally strikes a bystander but should be coded as homicide for manner of death (since the gun 
was used in a threatening manner to control others). 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
 
5.8.5 Loading or unloading gun: CME/LE_GunFiredLoadingUnloading 
 
Definition:  
Shooter was loading or unloading ammunition from the gun when it discharged.   
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
None 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm. 
 
 
5.8.6 Cleaning gun, repair, and assembling: CME/LE_GunCleaning 
 
Definition:  
The shooter pulled the trigger or the gun otherwise discharged (e.g., bumped gun while cleaning) while 
cleaning, repairing, or assembling/disassembling the gun. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
None 
 
Note: Before August 2013, this variable was only coded for deaths that occurred when the victim was 
cleaning the gun. After August 2013, the variable was expanded to include unintentional firearm deaths 
that occurred while the victim was also repairing or assembling/disassembling the gun. 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
 
5.8.7 Showing gun to others: CME/LE_GunShowing 
 
===== Page 143 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  143 | Page  
   
Definition:  
The shooter was showing the gun to another person when the gun discharged. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
None 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
 
5.8.8 Playing with gun: CME/LE_GunPlaying 
 
Definition:  
Shooter was playing with gun when it discharged. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
 Other phrases that would trigger coding this context include “horsing around” and “fooling around.” 
 This variable is not limited to children. For example, this could include suicide play (i.e., an adult 
pointing a gun believed to be unloaded at her and pulling the trigger). 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
 
5.8.9 Other context of injury: CME/LE_OtherContextInjury 
 
Definition:  
The shooting occurred during some context other than those described by the existing codes. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Always describe the other context of injury in the narrative. 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
 
5.8.10 Thought safety was engaged: CME/LE_GunThoughtSafetyEngaged 
 
===== Page 144 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  144 | Page  
   
Definition:  
Shooter thought the safety was on and the firearm would not discharge. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
None 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
 
5.8.11 Thought gun was unloaded, magazine disengaged: 
CME/LE_GunThoughtUnloadedMagazDisen 
 
Definition:  
Shooter thought the gun was unloaded because the magazine was disengaged. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
 This circumstance would not apply to revolvers, derringers, or certain long guns that do not use a 
magazine. 
 Frequently when the magazine is removed from a semi-automatic pistol, the gun handler believes it 
is unloaded when in fact a cartridge may remain in the firing chamber. 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
 
5.8.12 Thought gun was unloaded, other: CME/LE_GunThoughtUnloadedOther 
 
Definition:  
Shooter thought the gun was unloaded for a reason other than the magazine being disengaged, or for an 
unspecified reason. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
None 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
===== Page 145 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  145 | Page  
   
 
5.8.13 Unintentionally pulled trigger: CME/LE_GunUnintentPulledTrigger 
 
Definition:  
Shooter unintentionally pulled the trigger. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
None 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
 
5.8.14 Bullet ricochet: CME/LE_BulletRicochet 
 
Definition: 
Bullet ricocheted off course from its intended target and struck the victim. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
None 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
 
5.8.15 Gun defect or malfunction: CME/LE_GunDefectMalfunction 
 
Definition:  
Firearm discharged due to some defect or mechanical malfunction. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Code as “Yes” if the shooting resulted from a gun defect or malfunction. Because it is difficult for a non-
expert to judge whether a shooting resulted from operator error versus a true defect or malfunction, 
this code should be based on a finding by a trained firearm and tool-mark examiner. 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
===== Page 146 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  146 | Page  
   
 
5.8.16 Fired while holstering/unholstering : CME/LE_GunFiredHolstering 
 
Definition:  
Firearm discharged while it was being placed in or removed from its holster or clothing. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
 Code as “Yes” if the gun was being placed in or removed from its holster or clothing when it 
discharged. 
 Do not code if the gun discharged after falling out of a holster accidentally (code “Dropped gun” 
instead). 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
 
5.8.17 Dropped gun: CME/LE_GunDropped 
 
Definition:  
Gun was dropped and unintentionally discharged upon impact. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
 This code applies to situations in which the impact of the crash causes the gun to discharge. 
 It does not apply to situations in which a gun starts to fall and is fired when the handler grabs for it 
and unintentionally pulls the trigger. That situation should be coded as “Unintentionally pulled 
trigger.” 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm. 
 
 
5.8.18 Fired while operating safety/lock: CME/LE_GunFiredOperatingSafetyLock 
 
Definition: 
Gun unintentionally discharged while the gun handler was attempting to open or close the lock. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
===== Page 147 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  147 | Page  
   
This variable will be important in detecting any unintended injuries that result from using safety 
equipment. 
 
Also code: Code “Unintentionally pulled trigger” because the fatal injury occurred due to pulling the 
trigger. 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
 
5.8.19 Gun mistaken for toy: CME/LE_GunThoughtToy 
 
Definition: 
Gun was mistaken for a toy and discharged during handling/play. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
 Code as “Yes” if a person (usually a child) thought the gun was a toy and was firing it without 
understanding the danger. 
 This code applies to the shooter’s understanding of the gun that he or she was handling. 
 It does not apply to situations in which a person kills another person because they thought the 
victim was aiming a gun (in reality, a toy) at them. These situations would be coded as homicides. 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm. 
 
 
5.8.20 Other mechanism of injury: CME/LE_OtherMechanismInjury 
 
Definition:  
The shooting occurred as the result of a mechanism not already described by one of the existing codes. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion: 
Always describe the mechanism in the narrative. 
 
Manner of Death: Unintentional firearm.  
 
 
5.9 Other Circumstances: All Manners 
 
5.9.1 Other circumstance: CME/LE_CircumstancesOtherText 
 
Definition:  
===== Page 148 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  148 | Page  
   
Other specified problems contributed to the death. 
 
Response Option:  
Text 
 
Discussion:  
This variable should only be used if a noted contributory circumstance is not already covered by existing 
variables in the reporting system. 
 
 Be sure to describe the circumstance in the text field provided and in the narrative.  
 Please indicate if the other circumstance is a crisis. 
 
Manner of Death: All manners.  
 
 
5.9.2 Other circumstance was crisis: CME/LE CrisisOther 
 
Definition:  
Victim experienced a crisis within two weeks of the incident, or a crisis was imminent within two weeks 
of the incident that was not associated with another circumstance variable. 
 
Response Option:  
Text 
 
Discussion:  
This variable captures crises not associated with a standard NVDRS circumstance. Please note that in the 
analytic data file, the legacy data element “CrisisRecent” has been archived as of the 2016 dataset in 
order to avoid confusion. All cases endorsed as having a recent crisis in the legacy data, as well as 
current cases with a specific or “other” crisis as described above are captured under the calculated 
variable “AnyCrisis_c” in the analytic data file. 
 
Consistent with previous coding manual versions, a “Crisis” is a current/acute event (within two weeks 
of death) that is indicated in one of the source reports to have contributed to the death. Inclusion in the 
source document and indication that the event occurred within two weeks of the death is sufficient to 
code a circumstance a crisis. Direct language that the event caused or contributed to the death is not 
required to code “Yes.” 
 
The following guidance will assist in identifying crises (see also 5.1.6 “Coding the Crisis Variables): 
 
 A crisis can precede the death (e.g., had a bad argument the day before the incident, divorce papers 
served that day, or victim laid off the week before) or be an impending event (e.g., house was to be 
foreclosed on the day after the incident or court date for a criminal offense three days after the 
suicide). Crisis should be interpreted from the eyes of the victim. This is particularly relevant for 
young victims whose crises, such as a bad grade or a dispute with parents over a curfew, may 
appear to others as relatively minor. 
 An actual time period for the crisis may not be mentioned in the records, so use language as a clue. 
o “Decedent was experiencing financial difficulties after losing his job” would not trigger 
coding a recent crisis, because the timeframe is unclear 
===== Page 149 =====
 
Section 5. Circumstances  149 | Page  
   
o “Decedent had just received a pink slip at work” would be coded, because the word “just” 
indicates that the crisis occurred right before the death, or within two weeks. 
 Ongoing/chronic problems should not be coded as crises unless there was an acute change in the 
status (change in prognosis of chronic illness). Coding a case as being related to a crisis does not 
mean that there aren’t also chronic conditions that have contributed to the victim’s death. 
 A homicide followed by a suicide should always be coded as “Yes” for “Crisis” for the suicide victim 
unless the two deaths were both clearly consensual and planned in advance (i.e., a double suicide). 
 
Manner of Death: All manners. 
 
===== Page 150 =====
 
Section 6. Weapon Variables   150 | Page  
  
SECTION 6: WEAPON VARIABLES  
 
The concept of a weapon in NVDRS combines the concepts of objects used to injure and actions that 
lead to injury. Weapons can therefore range from instruments commonly thought of as weapons, such 
as a gun or bayonet, to actions such as setting fires, pushing someone over a cliff, or shaking (as in 
shaken baby syndrome). Only the weapon(s) that caused the death should be entered. When there are 
multiple weapons in an incident and the fatal weapon can be determined, only enter the weapon that 
caused the fatal injury. If a weapon caused a non-fatal injury, do not enter the weapon. For example, if a 
victim was shot in the head and stabbed in the foot, and the foot wound was known to be non-fatal, 
enter only the firearm. For the vast majority of deaths, only one weapon should be entered. 
 
General guidance on coding weapons is provided below: 
 
 If the weapon that caused the fatal injury cannot be determined, then enter all of the weapons that 
contributed to the death of the victim. For example, if a victim was shot in the chest and also 
stabbed in the chest, and it cannot be determined which wound was fatal (if not both); enter a 
firearm and a sharp instrument as separate weapons. 
 Legal intervention deaths represent a unique situation. How to code these incidents is described 
below. Sometimes an individual officer with a single firearm can be identified as firing the fatal shot. 
For those situations, one weapon (firearm) should be entered. 
o For situations where multiple officers fired and hit the victim, and the number of officers is 
specified, enter the number of weapons equal to the number of firearms causing injury. For 
example, for a report listing two officers known to have struck the victim, code two 
firearms. Do not count firearms associated with officers at the scene who did not fire their 
weapons. For example, if six officers were on scene but only two fired their weapons 
causing injury, code only two firearms. 
o If a report indicates multiple officers fired at the victim, but it is not known how many 
officers or how many firearms were involved, code only one firearm. 
 Coding deaths involving firearms  
o Details are collected on individual firearms, such as make, model, caliber, and gauge. If a 
victim was fatally injured by multiple firearms, and it is not possible to identify a single 
firearm as being responsible for the victim’s death, enter information for all of the firearms. 
o If a gun is not recovered, but the victim died of a gunshot wound, code the number of 
weapons as “1.” Guns on the scene that were not used to shoot the victim (e.g., a gun on 
the person of the victim) are not counted as weapons in the incident. 
 For poisonings, NVDRS tracks information on individual poisonous substances in the toxicology 
section, including the poison that killed the victim, while tracking the weapon type on the weapons 
screen. 
o For an incident where a single poison killed the victim, record the weapon type as 
“Poisoning” and identify the substance that killed the victim in the toxicology section by 
checking the “Cause of Death” box next to the substance on the toxicology screen. If 
multiple poisons resulted in the death of the victim, please record the weapon type as 
“Poisoning” and identify the substances suspected of killing the victim in the toxicology 
section by checking the “Cause of Death” box next to each substance that killed the victim. If 
it is unknown which poison killed the victim, do not check any of the “Cause of Death” 
boxes. 
o Poisons or drugs on the scene that were not ingested by the victim and not found in 
===== Page 151 =====
 
Section 6. Weapon Variables   151 | Page  
  
toxicology should not be entered. 
 Weapon types that are not firearms or poisons 
o For all other weapon types involved in a violent death, list the weapon only once per 
incident. For example, if multiple sharp objects or knives are used to kill one or more 
persons in an incident, enter only one weapon to represent all these sharp objects. If 
multiple knives and multiple blunt objects are used, one “Sharp instrument”                                
and one “Blunt instrument” weapon should be entered.  
o If a knife is not recovered, but the victim died from wounds inflicted by a sharp object, code 
the number of weapons as “1.” 
 
Note: Before August 2013, the number of weapons was limited to three. As of August 2013, there is no 
longer a limit of three weapons. Enter data for as many weapons as were involved in inflicting fatal 
injuries. 
 
 
6.1 Weapon Type: WeaponType 
 
Definition:  
Type of weapon or means used to inflict the fatal injury. 
 
Response Options: 
1 Firearm 
5 Non-powder gun 
6 Sharp instrument 
7 Blunt instrument 
8 Poisoning 
9 Hanging, strangulation, suffocation 
10 Personal weapons 
11 Fall 
12 Explosive 
13 Drowning 
14 Fire or burns 
15 Shaking (e.g., shaken baby syndrome) 
16 Motor Vehicle, including buses, motorcycles 
17 Other transport vehicle, (e.g., trains, planes, boats) 
18 Intentional neglect, (e.g., starving a baby or oneself) 
19 Biological weapons 
66 Other (e.g., Taser, electrocution, nail gun, exposure to environment/weather) 
99 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Weapon type reports the broad category of weapon(s) or means used to inflict the fatal injury. Objects 
(such as knives), actions (such as jumping from a height), hostile environments (such as fire, water), and 
even the lack of action (such as neglect of a child or disabled person) are all weapons in NVDRS. Only 
code more than one weapon when multiple weapons were known to have inflicted fatal injuries. 
Otherwise, if it is possible to determine, code only the primary weapon that resulted in death. When 
faced with choosing multiple possible weapon types, enter first the weapon that exerted the most force 
to the body or deprived it of essentials such as oxygen. 
===== Page 152 =====
 
Section 6. Weapon Variables   152 | Page  
  
 “Sharp instrument” refers not only to knives but also to razors, machetes, or pointed instruments 
(e.g., chisel, broken glass, bow and arrow). 
 “Blunt instrument” refers to clubs, bats, rocks, etc. or a general statement of “blunt force trauma.” If 
a victim is killed by the weight of a heavy object or objects, rather than by the force of impact, code 
“Other weapon” rather than “Blunt instrument.” 
 Carbon monoxide poisoning should be coded as a poisoning. For deaths where carbon monoxide 
due to a fire was also contributory, code “Carbon monoxide poisoning” as a secondary weapon and 
“Fire or burns” as the primary weapon. Also code: “Carbon monoxide source.” 
 Deaths involving asphyxiant (non-toxic) gases should be coded as suffocation. Asphyxiant gases are 
not normally harmful in the breathing air but become hazardous when elevated concentrations of 
these gases displace the normal oxygen concentration, occurring in either confined spaces (e.g., 
refrigerator) or direct, exclusive administration (e.g., inhaling contents of balloon filled with helium). 
Some common examples of asphyxiant gases are helium, nitrogen, argon, butane, propane.  
 “Personal weapons” include fists, feet, and hands in actions such as punching, kicking or hitting. If 
the victim is manually strangled, code “Hanging, strangulation, suffocation” instead of “Personal 
weapon.” 
 “Fall” covers both being pushed (as in a homicide) or jumping (as in a suicide). Generally, if a person 
is at standing height, is pushed by another, and falls backward hitting his head, code weapon as 
“Personal weapons” due to the push. If a person is higher than standing height, as in a two-story 
balcony or on a roof, code weapon as “Fall.” 
 For fires that cause deaths by burns or carbon monoxide poisoning, code “Fire or burns.” 
 If a victim is noted to have died by an external force (e.g., hanging, gunshot wound, stab wound, 
etc.), but also was noted to have a lethal level of alcohol or drugs in his or her system, code the 
weapon of external force and not the poisoning. 
 If a victim is fatally injured falling from a bridge into a body of water, the weapon type should reflect 
the information in the C/ME report. That is, if the victim was noted to have drowned, weapon type 
should be coded as “Drowning.” If the victim was noted to have died from injuries sustained on 
impact from hitting the water, weapon type should be coded as “Fall.” 
 
 
6.2 Other Weapon Information: WeaponOther 
 
Definition:  
Please put additional descriptive information about the weapon in this text box. If the weapon type is 
checked as “Other,” please describe the weapon here. 
 
Response Option: 
Text 
 
Discussion: 
 If the weapon type was classified as “Other,” please use this text box to describe the weapon. A 
weapon type should only be classified as “Other” after it has been determined that the weapon type 
does not match any of the standard categories. 
 Additional descriptive information about any type of weapon can also be placed in this field. For 
instance, modifications to firearms or a description of a sharp weapon can be entered. 
 
 
 
===== Page 153 =====
 
Section 6. Weapon Variables   153 | Page  
  
6.3 Firearm Variables 
 
The following twelve variables will only be completed when the weapon type is “Firearm.” These 
variables will not display for all other weapon types. 
 
 
6.3.1 Firearm type: FirearmType 
 
Definition:  
Specific type of firearm used to inflict injury. 
 
Response Options: 
1 Submachine Gun 
2 Handgun, Unknown Type 
3 Handgun, Pistol- Bolt Action 
4 Handgun, Pistol- Derringer 
5 Handgun, Pistol- Single Shot 
6 Handgun, Pistol- Semi-automatic 
7 Handgun, Revolver 
8 Rifle, Unknown Type 
9 Rifle, Automatic 
10 Rifle, Bolt Action 
11 Rifle, Lever Action 
12 Rifle, Pump Action 
13 Rifle, Semi-automatic 
14 Rifle, Single Shot 
15 Rifle-Shotgun Combination 
16 Shotgun, Unknown Type 
17 Shotgun, Automatic 
18 Shotgun, Bolt Action 
19 Shotgun, Double Barrel (Over/Under, Side by Side) 
20 Shotgun, Pump Action 
21 Shotgun, Semi-automatic 
22 Shotgun, Single Shot 
23 Long gun, Unknown type 
66 Other (e.g., handmade gun) 
99 Unknown  
 
 
6.3.2 Firearm caliber: FirearmCaliber 
6.3.3 Firearm gauge: FirearmGauge 
 
Definitions: 
 FirearmCaliber: Caliber of the firearm used to inflict the injury. 
 FirearmGauge: Gauge of firearm used to inflict the injury. 
 
 
 
===== Page 154 =====
 
Section 6. Weapon Variables   154 | Page  
  
Response Options: 
 
Caliber:    
556 5.56 mm 308 .308 in 
6 6 mm 32 .32 in 
635 6.35 mm 338 .338 in 
65 6.5 mm 35 .35 in 
7 7 mm 351 .351 in 
735 7.35 mm 357 .357 in 
75 7.5 mm 36 .36 in 
762 7.62 mm 375 .375 in 
763 7.63 mm 38 .38 in 
765 7.65 mm 380 .380 in 
8 8 mm 40 .40 in 
9 9 mm 401 .401 in 
10 10 mm 405 .405 in 
11 11 mm 41 .41 in 
17 .17 in 44 .44 in 
22 .22 in 444 .444 in 
221 .221 in 455 .455 in 
222 .222 in 458 .458 in 
223 .223 in 460 .460 in 
243 .243 in 50 .50 in 
25 .25 in 54 .54 in 
250 .250 in 58 .58 in 
256 .256 in 60 .60 in 
257 .257 in 1000 Undetermined whether .38 or .357 
264 .264 in 1001 Small, unspecified (<=32) 
270 .270 in 1002 Medium, unspecified (>32, <10mm/.40) 
280 .280 in 1003 Large, unspecified (>=10mm/.40) 
284 .284 in 6666 Other 
30 .30 in (including 30-06) 8888 Not applicable (shotgun or unknown gun type) 
 300 .300 in 9999 Unknown 
303 .303 in   
 
Discussion:  
These variables are designed to capture the caliber/gauge or estimated caliber/gauge of the firearm 
used in the fatal event. 
 
 Firearms have a caliber or a gauge but not both. Caliber is used with handguns and rifles. Gauge is 
used with shotguns. 
 The codes correspond to calibers, measured in fractions of an inch or in millimeters, or gauges in the 
case of shotguns. 
 Recovered cartridge casings, the firearm itself, and the bullet are sources for indicating or estimating 
the firearm caliber. 
 Some firearms will fire more than one type of cartridge. For example, firearms designed to fire the 
.357 Magnum will also fire .38 (Smith & Wesson) Special cartridges. 
===== Page 155 =====
 
Section 6. Weapon Variables   155 | Page  
  
 Unless a cartridge casing is recovered, it may be impossible to tell which cartridge type was involved 
in the incident. Consequently, this field should be coded from cartridge casings when they are 
available, from the markings stamped onto the firearm when cartridge casings are not recovered, 
and from recovered bullets when neither a casing nor a firearm is recovered. 
 A special code (1000) has been created for cases when a bullet has been recovered, and the absence 
of a cartridge or firearm makes it impossible to determine the difference between a .38 and a .357. 
 
The “caliber” of a rifle or handgun is the diameter of the bore before the rifling grooves were cut. 
 Caliber may also be given in terms of bullet, land, or groove diameter. 
 In some cases, the caliber specification associated with particular cartridge types is neither accurate 
nor consistent. For example, the caliber of the .38 Special cartridge is actually .357, not .38 as the 
cartridge type suggests. 
 
The term “gauge” is used to describe the size of the bore of a shotgun. 
 The term refers to the number of lead balls of the given bore diameter that make up a pound. In a 
12-gauge, for example, it takes 12 bore-diameter lead balls to make up a pound. 
 The most common exception to this nomenclature is the .410, which has a bore diameter of 0.410 
inches. 
 
 
6.3.4 Firearm make or NCIC code: FirearmMake 
6.3.5 Other Firearm make text: FirearmMakeText 
 
Definitions: 
 FirearmMake: Manufacturer of the firearm used to inflict the injury (e.g., Colt, Glock, Remington, 
Sig-Sauer) or National Crime Information Center (NCIC) code. 
 FirearmMakeText: Text field to indicate manufacturer of the firearm if “Make” is coded as “Other.” 
 
Response Options: 
 FirearmMake: Make from system 
666  Other make of firearm  
888  Not applicable 
999  Unknown 
 
 FirearmMakeTexts: Text 
 
Discussion:  
These data elements use a 3-character manufacturer code developed by the NCIC of the FBI. A code list 
covering make and model is supplied in a separate document in the software’s Help utility. The NVDRS 
software includes a list for the NCIC make codes. NVDRS Software includes a Make Alias feature that 
shows popular abbreviations, previous names, or industry nicknames for each manufacturer. If a source 
document indicates a make alias the manufacture associated with the alias should be coded.  
 
 If a manufacturer does not appear in the code list, please mark “Other make of firearm” and enter 
the manufacturer in “MakeText.” 
 Use “Unknown” when make is unknown. 
===== Page 156 =====
 
Section 6. Weapon Variables   156 | Page  
  
 Use “Ghost Gun” when the firearm is indicated as being homemade (can be 3D printed or made 
from home build kit) and has never had a serial number. Firearms that have a serial number 
removed should not be coded as this. These guns will not have a model associated with them.  
 
 
6.3.6 Firearm model: FirearmModel 
6.3.7 Other Firearm model text: FirearmModelText  
 
Definitions: 
 FirearmModel: Model of the firearm that was used to inflict the injury (e.g., 1911, 17, 870 Express 
Magnum, P226). 
 FirearmModelText: Text field to indicate model of the firearm if model was coded as “Other.” 
 
Response Options: 
 FirearmModel 
Text 
 Other model of firearm 
“Not applicable”  
“Unknown” 
 FirearmModelText:  
Text 
 
Discussion:  
These data elements are coded using a list of models (sorted by manufacturer). A combination of make 
and model must be used to uniquely identify the firearm type, as some models are made by more than 
one manufacturer. 
 
 Code as “[model](Other/Unspecified)” If a general model series appears in the code list but differs 
slightly from available response options. If model(Other/Unspecified) is not an option in the code 
list, please mark “Other model of firearm” and enter the model in “FirearmModelText.” Example: 
source document states general Citori shotgun, code as response option Citori(Other/Unspecified).  
 If a specific model is not known, choose “Unknown.” 
 If a model does not appear in the code list, please mark “Other model of firearm” and enter the 
model in “FirearmModelText.” When completing “FirearmModelText,” capitalize all text, avoid using 
dashes and decimals, and omit spaces. 
 Completely spell out the model name; do not use abbreviations. 
 
 
6.3.8 Gun stored loaded: GunLoaded 
6.3.9 Gun stored locked: GunStoredLocked  
 
Definitions: 
 GunLoaded: Was the firearm used in the violent death stored loaded? 
 GunStoredLocked: Was the firearm used in the violent death stored locked? 
 
Response Options:  
 GunLoaded  
0 Stored Unloaded 
===== Page 157 =====
 
Section 6. Weapon Variables   157 | Page  
  
1 Stored Loaded 
6 Other (specify in gun access narrative) 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
 GunStoredLocked  
0 Not locked 
1 Locked (stored with trigger lock on or in locked enclosure like closet) 
6 Other (specify in gun access narrative) 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
These variables are to be coded when a firearm was used by a victim or suspect to inflict the fatal injury 
in suicides, homicides, undetermined deaths, and unintentional firearm deaths. Although this 
information may not be known for a substantial percent of homicides and some suicides, this 
information is useful to collect in violent deaths, especially those involving youth (e.g., persons 17 years 
of age or younger) and suicides or homicides where a gun was accessed quickly by the victim/suspect 
right before the incident. 
 
 In the narrative, include a brief summary of where and from whom the firearm was obtained and 
whether the youth had authorized access to the firearm. 
 
Note: Before August 2013, this variable primarily collected information on youth victims and suspects 
and was optional to collect on adult violent deaths involving a firearm. After August 2013, this 
information is collected for all firearm deaths where data are available. 
 
 
6.3.10 Gun Access Narrative: GunAccessNarrative 
 
Definition:  
The gun access narrative provides details about how the victim or suspect got access to the firearm used 
to inflict the fatal injury. 
 
Response Option:  
Text 
 
Discussion:  
Complete this variable when a firearm was used by a victim or suspect to inflict the fatal injury in 
suicides, homicides, undetermined deaths, and unintentional firearm deaths. The gun access narrative 
should include a brief summary of where and from whom the firearm was obtained. For incidents 
involving youth, include whether or not the youth had authorized access to the firearm. Although this 
information may not be known for a substantial percent of homicides and some suicides, this 
information is especially useful to collect in violent deaths involving youth (e.g., persons 17 years of age 
or younger) and suicides or homicides where a gun is accessed quickly by the victim/suspect right before 
the incident. 
 
Note: Before August 2013, this variable primarily collected information on youth victims and suspects 
===== Page 158 =====
 
Section 6. Weapon Variables   158 | Page  
  
and was optional to collect on adult violent deaths involving a firearm. After August 2013, this 
information is collected for all firearm deaths where data are available. 
 
 
6.3.11 Gun owner: GunOwner 
 
Definition:  
Owner of the firearm used to inflict the fatal injury. 
 
Response Options: 
1 Shooter 
2 Parent of shooter 
3 Other family member of shooter 
4  Spouse/Intimate partner of shooter 
6 Friend/Acquaintance of shooter 
7 Stranger to shooter 
66 Other (specify in gun access narrative)  
99  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Code this variable when a firearm was used by a victim or suspect to inflict the fatal injury in suicides, 
homicides, undetermined deaths, and unintentional firearm deaths. This variable can be used to better 
understand how victims and suspects gain access to the firearms they use to injure themselves or 
others. 
 
Note: Before August 2013, this variable primarily collected information on youth victims and suspects 
and was optional to collect on adult violent deaths involving a firearm. After August 2013, this 
information is collected on all firearm deaths where data is available. In November 2020, this variable 
was modified to add “Spouse/Intimate partner of shooter.” 
 
 
6.3.12 Firearm stolen: FirearmStolen 
 
Definition:  
Firearm listed or reported as stolen. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Code this variable when a firearm was used by a victim or suspect to inflict the fatal injury in suicides, 
homicides, undetermined deaths, and unintentional firearm deaths. Code as “Yes” if the firearm was 
formally reported as stolen in Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) trace results, LE reports, 
or if law enforcement or the coroner/medical examiner learned that the firearm had been stolen during 
the course of the death investigation. 
===== Page 159 =====
 
Section 6. Weapon Variables   159 | Page  
  
 If a household member takes a firearm from another household member and uses it without his or 
her permission, do not code the firearm as stolen unless the owner had reported the firearm as 
stolen to law enforcement. 
===== Page 160 =====
 
Section 7. Suspect Variables   160 | Page  
  
SECTION 7: SUSPECT VARIABLES  
 
 
A suspect is defined as a person believed to have committed a crime and who is, therefore, being 
investigated by the police. 
 
 There are no suspects for isolated suicides and self-inflicted unintentional firearm deaths. 
 For homicides, include as suspects people who are listed in the LE and/or CME reports as suspects. 
 For unintentional firearm deaths that are not self-inflicted, include the person who fired the weapon 
as a suspect and anyone else listed by law enforcement as a suspect. 
 A person does not have to be arrested or identified to be listed as a suspect. As long as the number 
of persons involved in the death is known, (e.g., law enforcement report that the victim was stabbed 
by two men), list each as a suspect, even if nothing further is known about them. 
 If there is no information at all about suspects in the source documents, do not include any suspects 
in the incident. 
 
Note: Before August 2013, a victim could only be associated with three suspects. After August 2013, a 
victim can be associated with any number of suspects. The program automatically links a victim to 
associated suspects and each suspect will be assigned its own row in the suspects table. 
 
 
7.1 Suspect age in years: AgeYearsSuspect 
 
Definition:  
Age of the suspect at the time of the incident in years. 
 
Response Options: 
Age Years: 1 to 125 
999  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Unlike age of victim, age of suspect should be reported in years, because very young children are 
unlikely to be suspects. 
 
 If age is not provided, code as “999” for “Unknown.”  
 Sometimes the suspect’s age will be reported as a range 
o If age is provided within a five-year age range or less, choose the midpoint of the range; 
round to the lower year if the midpoint calculation results in a half year. For example, a 
suspect reported to be 20 to 25 years of age would be entered as “22.” 
o If an age range of greater than 5 years is provided, enter the age as unknown. For instance, 
a suspect whose reported age was between 20 and 30 would be entered as “999.” 
 
 
7.2 Suspect sex:  SexSuspect 
 
Definition:  
Sex of the suspect is the sex as listed in the source documents. 
===== Page 161 =====
 
Section 7. Suspect Variables   161 | Page  
  
 
Response Options: 
1 Male 
2 Female 
9 Unknown  
 
Discussion: 
None  
 
 
7.3 Victim to Suspect relation 1: VictimSuspectRelationship1 
 
Definition: 
Description of the primary relationship of the victim to the suspect. 
 
Response Options: 
1 Spouse 
2 Ex-spouse 
3 Girlfriend or boyfriend 
7 Ex-girlfriend or ex-boyfriend 
8 Girlfriend or boyfriend, unspecified whether current or ex 
10 Parent 
11 Child 
12 Sibling 
13 Grandchild 
14 Grandparent 
15 In-law 
16 Stepparent 
17 Stepchild 
18 Child of suspect’s boyfriend/girlfriend (e.g., child killed by mother’s boyfriend) 
19 Intimate partner of suspect’s parent (e.g., teenager kills his mother’s boyfriend) 
20 Foster child 
21 Foster parent 
29 Other family member (e.g., cousin, uncle, etc.) 
30 Babysitter (e.g., child killed by babysitter) 
31 Acquaintance 
32 Friend 
33 Roommate (not intimate partner) 
34 Schoolmate 
35 Current/former work relationship (e.g., co-worker, employee, employer) 
36 Rival gang member 
37  Victim was new partner of suspect's ex-partner (e.g., woman's ex-boyfriend killed her new 
boyfriend) 
38  Victim was ex-partner of suspect's current partner (e.g., woman's new boyfriend killed her ex-
boyfriend) 
44 Other person known to victim  
45  Stranger 
50 Victim was injured by law enforcement officer 
===== Page 162 =====
 
Section 7. Suspect Variables   162 | Page  
  
51 Victim was law enforcement officer injured in the line of duty 
99 Relationship Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
These variables will be assigned by the abstractor for each suspect for a given victim. 
 
 Use the following sentence as a guide for selecting the appropriate description of the relationship: 
“The victim is the ____________ of the suspect.” For example, when a parent kills a child, the 
relationship is “Child” not “Parent” (“The victim is the child of the suspect”). Please note that this 
sentence is intended to be a general guide. However, some relationships may not be captured by 
this sentence (e.g., babysitter [e.g., child killed by babysitter], victim was injured by law enforcement 
officer).   
 
 Prioritization in coding: 
1) intimate partner relationships (spouses, girlfriend/boyfriend, ex-partners) or law enforcement 
2) other family relationships 
3) rival gang member 
4) any other relationship 
5) strangers 
 
 Gay and lesbian relationships should be coded in the same way as heterosexual relationships (e.g., 
“girlfriend” or “boyfriend”). The nature of the relationship will be indicated by the sex of the victim 
and suspect. 
 A “babysitter” includes childcare providers such as nannies or relatives of a child other than a parent 
or guardian. 
 An “acquaintance” is someone with or about whom the victim has had some prior interaction or 
knowledge. 
 A “stranger” is someone with whom the victim has had no prior interaction before the event that 
culminated in the violent injury. 
 Where there is more than one offender working together in an incident (as in a drive-by shooter and 
his or her driver), code the victim’s relationship to each offender individually (e.g., the victim may 
have known one suspect, but not known two other suspects). 
 If it is unknown whether the victim and suspect were strangers or not, code as “99 – Unknown.” 
 If the victim and suspect knew each other, but the exact nature of their relationship is unclear, code 
as “44 – Other person known to victim.” 
 
Note: This variable was modified in November 2020 to include victim/suspect relationship categories 37 
and 38.  
 
 
7.4 Victim to Suspect relation 2: VictimSuspectRelationship2 
 
Definition:  
Description of the secondary relationship of the victim to the suspect. 
 
Response Options: 
1 Spouse 
2 Ex-spouse 
===== Page 163 =====
 
Section 7. Suspect Variables   163 | Page  
  
3 Girlfriend or boyfriend 
7 Ex-girlfriend or ex-boyfriend 
8 Girlfriend or boyfriend, unspecified whether current or ex 
10 Parent 
11 Child 
12 Sibling 
13 Grandchild 
14 Grandparent 
15 In-law 
16 Stepparent 
17 Stepchild 
18 Child of suspect’s boyfriend/girlfriend (e.g., child killed by mother’s boyfriend) 
19 Intimate partner of suspect’s parent (e.g., teenager kills his mother’s boyfriend) 
20 Foster child 
21 Foster parent 
29 Other family member (e.g., cousin, uncle, etc.) 
30 Babysitter (e.g., child killed by babysitter) 
31 Acquaintance 
32 Friend 
33 Roommate (not intimate partner) 
34 Schoolmate 
35 Current/former work relationship (e.g., co-worker, employee, employer) 
36 Rival gang member 
37  Victim was new partner of suspect's ex-partner (e.g., woman's ex-boyfriend killed her new 
boyfriend) 
38  Victim was ex-partner of suspect's current partner (e.g., woman's new boyfriend killed her ex-
boyfriend) 
44 Other person known to victim  
45  Stranger 
50 Victim was injured by law enforcement officer 
51 Victim was law enforcement officer injured in the line of duty 
88 All relevant information about relationship is already provided in Victim to Suspect Relation 1 
(entered in the Relationship 2 field) 
99 Relationship Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
If the victim has two or more relationships with the suspect (e.g., co-workers and intimate partner), this 
variable should be completed.  
 Use the following sentence as a guide for selecting the appropriate description of the relationship: 
“The victim is the ______________ of the suspect.” For example, when a parent kills a child, the 
relationship is “Child” not “Parent” (“The victim is the child of the suspect.”). Please note that this 
sentence is intended to be a general guide. However, some relationships may not be captured by 
this sentence (e.g., babysitter [e.g., child killed by babysitter], victim was injured by law enforcement 
officer).   
 
 Prioritization in coding: 
1) intimate partner relationships (spouses, girlfriend/boyfriend, ex-partners) or law enforcement 
2) other family relationships 
===== Page 164 =====
 
Section 7. Suspect Variables   164 | Page  
  
3) rival gang member 
4) any other relationship 
5) strangers 
 Gay and lesbian relationships should be coded in the same way as heterosexual relationships (e.g., 
“girlfriend” or “boyfriend”). The nature of the relationship will be indicated by the sex of the victim 
and suspect. 
 A “babysitter” includes childcare providers such as nannies or relatives of a child other than a parent 
or guardian. 
 An “acquaintance” is someone with or about whom the victim has had some prior interaction or 
knowledge. 
 A “stranger” is someone with whom the victim has had no prior interaction before the event that 
culminated in the violent injury. 
 Where there is more than one offender working together in an incident (as in a drive-by shooter and 
his or her driver), code the victim’s relationship to each offender individually (e.g., the victim may 
have known one suspect, but not known two other suspects). 
 If it is unknown whether the victim and suspect were strangers or not, code as “99 – Unknown.” 
 If the victim and suspect knew each other, but the exact nature of their relationship is unclear, code 
as “44 – Other person known to victim.” 
 If all relevant information regarding the relationship is captured in “Victim to Suspect Relation 1,” 
then code “Victim to Suspect Relation 2” as “88 – All relevant information about relationship is 
already provided in Victim to Suspect Relation 1.” 
 
Note: This variable was modified in November 2020 to include victim/suspect relationship categories 37 
and 38.  
 
 
7.5 History of abuse of victim by this suspect: AbuseHistory 
 
Definition:  
History of abuse of victim by this suspect. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox 
 
Discussion:  
For each victim-suspect pair in which (1) the offender was a caregiver of the victim including children 
taking care of their parents or (2) the offender was a current or ex-intimate partner, indicate whether 
the data sources document a history (or suspected history) of abuse of this victim by the suspect. 
 
 The evidence of ongoing abuse may be suspected but not confirmed. 
 Abuse can be physical, psychological, sexual, or other as long as the source document refers to 
abuse. 
 
Also code: If the suspect was a caregiver and abuse/neglect is ongoing, consider coding “Abuse/neglect 
led to death.” If the abuse involved child maltreatment, consider coding “History of abuse or neglect as 
a child.” 
 
 
===== Page 165 =====
 
Section 7. Suspect Variables   165 | Page  
  
7.6 This suspect was a caregiver for the victim: CareGiver 
 
Definition:  
Suspect was a caregiver for this victim 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Collected, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
After indicating the relationship for each victim-suspect pair, determine whether the offender was a 
caregiver for the victim. Caregiver includes children taking care of their parents. 
 
Also code: If applicable, code “Abuse/neglect led to death” if the abuse caused the victim’s death or 
“History of abuse or neglect as a child,” if the abuse involved child maltreatment. 
 
 
7.7 Suspect attempted suicide after incident: AttemptedSuicide 
 
Definition:  
Suspect attempted suicide (fatally or non-fatally) after the death of the victim. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Collected, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
This variable is suspect specific. 
 
 Code as “Yes” if a suspect attempted suicide after the death of the victim during the incident, 
whether the attempt was fatal or non-fatal. 
 Refer to the Violent Death Incident section of this document for guidance on whether a suicide 
involving the suspect is to be considered as part of the same NVDRS incident as the homicide. 
 
 
7.8 Suspect is also a victim in the incident: SuspectAlsoVictim 
 
Definition:  
This indicates that the suspect for this victim is also a victim of homicide, suicide, legal intervention, or 
death of undetermined intent in the incident (e.g., a suspect/victim). 
 
Response Option:  
Checkbox 
 
Discussion:  
In incidents involving a victim/suspect, this variable can help link the suspect and victim information. 
 
Examples of when a suspect is also a victim in the incident:  
===== Page 166 =====
 
Section 7. Suspect Variables   166 | Page  
  
 A man kills his wife and then dies by suicide. He is a suspect because he killed someone else, and a 
suicide victim because he died by suicide; therefore, he is both suspect and victim. 
 A person robs a store and kills the store clerk. While running from the store he is shot and killed by a 
law enforcement officer. The person is a suspect in the killing of the store clerk and is a legal 
intervention victim because he is killed by a law enforcement officer; therefore, he is both a suspect 
and a victim. 
 A husband learns his wife is having an affair with a male friend. The husband kills the male friend in 
anger. The distraught wife kills her husband. The husband is a suspect because he killed the male 
friend, and a victim because he was then killed by his wife; therefore, he is both a suspect and a 
victim. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
 
7.9 Suspect Mentally Ill: SuspectMentallyIll 
 
Definition:  
The suspect’s attack on the victim is believed to be the direct result of a mental illness. 
 
Response Option:  
Checkbox 
 
Discussion:  
Code as “Yes” if the suspect’s attack on the victim is believed to be the direct result of the suspect’s 
mental illness. A suspect that is undergoing psychiatric care or has been ordered to receive a 
psychological evaluation by a court may be considered “mentally ill” for purposes of this variable. 
 
This circumstance may only be endorsed for homicide victims. Victims of suicide do not have “suspects” 
in NVDRS, so this circumstance will never be endorsed for a suicide victim. Mental health problems, 
diagnoses, and treatment of suicide victims are captured by other variables. 
 
 
7.10 Suspect had developmental disability at time of incident: 
SuspectDevelopmentalDisability 
 
Definition:  
Suspect had a developmental disability at time of incident. 
 
Response Options:  
0  No, Not available, Unknown 
1  Yes  
 
Discussion:  
Developmental disability (as expressed by terms that may be found in source documents, such as 
autism, intellectual impairments, “mentally challenged,” “mental retardation,” “special needs,” etc.) 
implies a chronic cognitive or developmental deficit that has a substantial, long-term effect on day-to-
day function. The developmental disability can be perceived or diagnosed. 
 
===== Page 167 =====
 
Section 7. Suspect Variables   167 | Page  
  
Note: This variable was added in August 2016. 
 
 
7.11 Suspected alcohol use by suspect: SuspectAlcoholUseSuspected  
 
Definition:  
Suspected alcohol use by the suspect in the hours preceding the incident. 
 
Response Options:  
0  No, Not available, Unknown 
1  Yes  
 
Discussion:  
“SuspectAlcoholUseSuspected” can be coded as “Yes” based on witness or investigator reports (e.g., 
Law enforcement noted that the suspect “had been drinking heavily”), or circumstantial evidence (e.g., 
empty six pack scattered around the suspect). This variable refers only to alcohol use and not drug use. 
The phrase “in the hours preceding the incident” can be interpreted relatively broadly.  
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2016. 
 
 
7.12 Suspected substance use by the suspect: SuspectSubstanceUseSuspected  
 
Definition:  
Suspected substance use by the suspect in the hours preceding the incident. 
 
Response Options:  
0  No, Not available, Unknown 
1  Yes  
 
Discussion:  
“SuspectSusbstanceUseSuspected” can be coded as “Yes” based on witness or investigator reports (e.g., 
Law enforcement noted that the suspect was “under the influence of drugs”), or circumstantial evidence 
(e.g., used syringes scattered around the suspect). This variable refers only to drug use and not alcohol 
use. The phrase “in the hours preceding the incident” can be interpreted relatively broadly.  
 
Note: As of August 2013, a person who takes methadone is no longer assumed to be in treatment for 
heroin addiction and should be coded as “No” unless other information is available (e.g., taking 
methadone as part of substance abuse treatment).  
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2016. 
 
 
7.13 Suspect recently released from an institution: SuspectRecentRelease  
 
Definition:  
Suspect injured victim within a month of being released from or admitted to an institutional setting.  
 
===== Page 168 =====
 
Section 7. Suspect Variables   168 | Page  
  
Response Options:  
0  No evidence of recent release  
1  Jail, prison, or a detention facility  
2  Hospital  
3  Psychiatric hospital  
4  Other psychiatric institution  
5  Long term residential health facility (e.g., nursing home)  
6  Supervised residential facility related to alcohol or substance abuse treatment (e.g., residential  
treatment facility, sober house or group home)  
7  Supervised residential facilities not related to alcohol or substance abuse treatment (e.g., 
halfway houses or work-release homes)  
9  Other  
99  Unknown type of institution 
 
Discussion:  
Without evidence of a release within the past month from an institutionalized setting in the data 
sources, this variable should be coded as “0.” In contrast, if there is evidence that the suspect was 
released from an institutionalized setting in the last month; the type of institution (e.g., jail, hospital, or 
psychiatric hospital) should be coded. The suspect is considered institutionalized if they spent one or 
more nights in the institution. For instance, if a suspect was released three days ago from an overnight 
institutional stay or a stay of over a year, the abstractor would record the type of institution from which 
they were released. If an individual was recently released from more than one facility/institution, code 
the one from which they were MOST RECENTLY released.  
 Code both voluntary and involuntary commitments. The death should be coded as “0” if a 
suspect visits an institution for medical care (e.g., emergency department) and does not stay 
overnight or is arrested and not held overnight.  
 If the document(s) state that the suspect was “just” or “recently” released and provides no 
specific timing on the release, the abstractor should consider the suspect recently released and 
record the type of institution from which he or she was released.  
 If the suspect was hospitalized in a psychiatric ward of a non-psychiatric hospital, code type of 
institution as "Psychiatric hospital."  
 
When this code is endorsed, the narrative should include information on the reason for being 
institutionalized (e.g., incarcerated for aggravated assault, hospitalized for a broken hip, or released 
from court mandated drug treatment), the type of institution (e.g., hospital or prison), the length the 
suspect was institutionalized, and problems related to the release, if applicable (e.g., unable to find a job 
after release or financial difficulties after release).  
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2016. 
 
 
7.14 Suspect recently in contact with law enforcement: SuspectContactWithPolice  
 
Definition:  
Suspect had contact with law enforcement in the past 12 months. 
 
Response Options:  
0  No, Not available, Unknown 
===== Page 169 =====
 
Section 7. Suspect Variables   169 | Page  
  
1  Yes  
 
Discussion:  
This variable refers to whether the suspect had contact with law enforcement in the 12 months prior to 
the fatal incident. An arrest does not need to have been made to endorse this variable. This may include 
scenarios where police were called, but no charges were filed.  
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2016. 
 
 
7.15 Suspect Race Variables 
7.15.1 Suspect White: RaceWhiteSuspect 
7.15.2 Suspect Black or African American: RaceBlackSuspect 
7.15.3 Suspect Asian: RaceAsianSuspect 
7.15.4 Suspect Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander: RacePacificIslanderSuspect 
7.15.5 Suspect American Indian or Alaska Native: RaceAmericanIndianSuspect 
7.15.6 Suspect Unspecified race: RaceUnspecifiedSuspect 
 
Definitions: Race± 
 RaceWhiteSuspect: Person with origins among any of the original peoples of Europe, North Africa, 
or the Middle East.  
 RaceBlackSuspect: Person with origins among any of the Black racial groups of Africa. 
 RaceAsianSuspect: Person with origins among any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast 
Asia, or the Indian subcontinent. 
 RacePacificIslanderSuspect: Person with origins among any of the original peoples of the Pacific 
Islands (includes Native Hawaiians). 
 RaceAmericanIndianSuspect: Person with origins among any of the original peoples of North 
America and who maintains cultural identification through tribal affiliation or community 
recognition (includes Alaska Natives). 
 RaceUnspecifiedSuspect: If a person’s ethnicity is provided in place of their race, e.g., race is given 
as “Hispanic,” and no other valid race value is given, mark their race as “unspecified.” 
 
Response Option:  
Checkbox 
 
Discussion:  
For multi-racial decedents, please check each race identified in source documents (e.g., if the decedent 
is identified as “white” and “Asian,” please check “white” and “Asian”). If “Asian/Pacific Islander” is 
indicated, check both “Asian” and “Pacific Islander.” These standards were used by the U.S. Census 
Bureau in the 2000 decennial census. 
 
±NVDRS follows HHS and OMB standards for race/ethnicity categorization. HHS guidance on 
race/ethnicity is available from: http://aspe.hhs.gov/datacncl/standards/ACA/4302/index.shtml 
 
 
7.16   Suspect Hispanic/Latino/Spanish: EthnicitySuspect 
 
Definition:  
===== Page 170 =====
 
Section 7. Suspect Variables   170 | Page  
  
Ethnicity± of the suspect of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central or South American, or other Spanish 
culture or origin, regardless of race. 
 
Response Options: 
0 Not Hispanic or Latino 
1 Hispanic or Latino 
9  Unknown  
 
Discussion:  
None  
 
±NVDRS follows HHS and OMB standards for race/ethnicity categorization. HHS guidance on 
race/ethnicity is available from: http://aspe.hhs.gov/datacncl/standards/ACA/4302/index.shtml
===== Page 171 =====
 
Section 8. Toxicology Variables  171 | Page  
  
SECTION 8: TOXICOLOGY VARIABLES  
 
 
Toxicology information is important to collect in order to understand the role of alcohol, illicit drugs, and 
prescription drugs in violent deaths. 
 
 
8.1 Instructions for Entering Toxicology Information 
 
In the Toxicology Findings section: 
 
 Enter all substances with positive toxicology findings. For each substance that tested positive, enter 
the matching substance name, that it was tested, and that the results were present. Also, enter 
whether or not the substance caused the death and the person the substance was prescribed for. 
 Enter all substances that are listed as a contributing cause of death on the DC even if a toxicology 
test was not conducted or the results were not available. 
 (Optional Step) Enter information for substances that were tested and had negative results. 
 Review your entries and hit “Save.” This will auto-populate the Toxicology Summary section. If you 
edit the Toxicology Findings section after you first “Save,” it will no longer auto-populate and you 
will need to manually verify the changes to the Toxicology Summary. 
 
In the Toxicology Summary section: 
 
 Enter responses to tested and results fields for all of the summary categories (alcohol, carbon 
monoxide, amphetamines, anticonvulsants, antidepressants, antipsychotics, barbiturates, 
benzodiazepines, cocaine, marijuana, muscle relaxants, and opiates) that were not completed with 
the auto fill. 
 Enter Blood Alcohol Content and Source of Carbon Monoxide, if applicable. 
 
 
8.2 No toxicology information: NoToxicologyAvailable 
 
Definition:  
A toxicology report was not available. 
 
Response Option:  
Checkbox 
 
Discussion:  
Checking this variable will prevent you from being able to enter any toxicology information. This variable 
is exported to the victim’s file and not the toxicology file. 
 
 
8.3 Date specimens were collected: SpecimensDate 
 
Definition:  
Date that body specimens were collected. 
 
Response Option: 
Date (format: MM/DD/YYYY) 
===== Page 172 =====
 
Section 8. Toxicology Variables  172 | Page  
  
 
06/99/2007 for June 2007 with the day unknown  
99/99/2007 for 2007 with the month and day unknown 
88/88/8888 Not applicable (no specimens collected) 
99/99/9999 Unknown (Use “99” for unknown day/month and “9999” unknown year). 
 
Discussion:  
Date and time of collection of body specimens, in conjunction with date and time of death and injury, 
can be used to assess the validity of alcohol and drug testing results and the possible contribution of 
drugs or alcohol to the injury. For example, blood specimens drawn long after death will not accurately 
reflect intoxication level at the time of death. The date of the postmortem exam can be used as the date 
specimens were collected in the absence of other information. 
 
 
8.4 Time specimens were collected: SpecimensTime 
 
Definition:  
Time that body specimens were collected. 
 
Response Options: 
0000 to 2359 24-hour format (2:00 PM coded as 1400)  
7777  Not collected by reporting site 
8888  Not applicable 
9999  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Time is in the military time format HHMM and can be 0000 (midnight) to 2359 (11:59 PM). See “Date 
specimens were collected” for further discussion. 
 
 
8.5 No substance(s) given as cause of death: NoSubstanceGiven 
 
Definition:  
Victim died from poisoning or substance overdose but no specific substance(s) was given as cause of 
death.  
 
Response Option:  
Checkbox 
 
The “Cause of Death” checkboxes associated with specific substances are disabled when box is checked. 
In order for this information to be abstracted into the system, this box must be unchecked if later 
information indicates that a specific substance or substance class caused death.  
 
Discussion:  
The purpose of this variable is to capture instances where a victim died from poisoning or substance 
overdose but no specific substance(s) was given as cause of death in the source document(s). The source 
===== Page 173 =====
 
Section 8. Toxicology Variables  173 | Page  
  
document(s) may mention the victim’s cause of death was due to poisoning or a substance overdose but 
fail to list a specific substance or substance class (e.g., opioid), or the source document(s) may use 
generic terminology such as substance toxicity or polysubstance misuse when describing victim’s cause 
of death by poisoning.  
 
The information for this variable would come primarily from the DC; however, it may also infrequently 
be included in the C/ME report. This variable is only applicable for the following: Incident Type 3 
(SUDORS) cases, cases where the "SUDORS Case" box on the Overdose (OD) tab is checked, and NVDRS 
cases where the victim has a weapon type = 8 (poisoning).  
 
Examples of when to endorse this variable:  
 The source document(s) indicates the victim died from polysubstance misuse or substance 
toxicity but does not list a specific substance or substance class (e.g., opioid) as cause of death. 
 The source document(s) indicates the victim died from poisoning or a substance overdose but 
does not list a specific substance or substance class (e.g., opioid) as cause of death. 
Note: This variable was added in August 2021.  
 
 
 
8.6 Substance Name: SubstanceName 
 
Definition:  
Substance name in toxicology report.  
 
Response Option:  
Look-up table 
 
Discussion:  
Many labs report test results as both the specific substance that a person was tested for (e.g., Prozac) 
and the category (e.g., antidepressants) that the substance falls under. Some, however, report only the 
substance or only the category. The look up table will help identify the broad categories the substance 
falls under. The order of the substances is not important—there is no implication that “Substance Name 
1” is more significant than “Substance Name 2,” for example. However, to simplify data entry, it is 
recommended to enter the substances in the same order they are mentioned in the source document. 
 
Each substance is entered as a row in the toxicology table and there is no limit on the number of 
substances that can be entered. 
 
Note: Questions about whether a chemical is a metabolite can be referred to CDC. If a substance cannot 
be found in the look-up table, 
 Code “Other Poison, not otherwise specified” in the substance field, 
 Enter results for the “Tested,” “Results,” “Cause of Death,” and “Person Prescribed For” fields as 
with any other substance, 
 Record the name of the substance in “Comments” field at the top of the Toxicology section, and  
 Contact CDC (NVDRS-Coding@cdc.gov) so the substance can be added to the toxicology drop-
===== Page 174 =====
 
Section 8. Toxicology Variables  174 | Page  
  
down menu. 
 
Reference: The look-up table is based upon data from the Lexi-Comp drug database: Lexi-Comp 
OnlineTM, Hudson, Ohio: Lexi-Comp, Inc.; August 14, 2012 and reports of the data should recognize the 
license appropriately. 
 
 
8.7 Substance Tested: SubstanceTested 
 
Definition:  
Substance was tested for according to the toxicology report. 
 
Response Options: 
1 Tested 
2 Not tested 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
These variables indicate whether the victim’s blood, urine, vitreous humor (ocular fluid), bile, or other 
specimens were tested for a variety of drugs or their metabolites by any standard toxicology screening 
method. Each substance is entered as a row in the toxicology table and there is no limit on the number 
of substances that can be entered. 
 
  
8.8 Substance Result: SubstanceResult 
 
Definition:  
Toxicology test results for the substance. 
 
Response Options: 
1 Present (e.g., “positive,” “presumptive presence,” or having a numeric level greater than 0) 
2 Not present 
8 Not applicable (e.g., Testing was not done) 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
When Substances Tested is “Unknown” or “Not Tested,” the program will automatically code the 
Substance Result as “Not applicable.” Each substance is entered as a row in the toxicology table and 
there is no limit on the number of substances that can be entered. 
 
 
8.9 Substance Caused Death: SubstanceCausedDeath 
 
Definition:  
Substance clearly identified as the cause of death. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Unknown 
===== Page 175 =====
 
Section 8. Toxicology Variables  175 | Page  
  
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
The “Cause of Death” variable captures any substance that caused or contributed to the substance 
overdose death. If a source document clearly identifies a single substance as the cause of death, code 
only that substance as causing the death. A substance listed as a contributing cause of death on the DC 
OR listed as a contributing cause in the C/ME report or elsewhere (e.g., within the toxicology report 
itself) should be checked as a “Cause of Death.” For example, if the DC does not specify that a certain 
substance contributed to death but elsewhere in the C/ME report it is indicated that the substance did 
contribute (e.g., C/ME noted that the decedent tested positive for a lethal concentration of fentanyl), 
the “Cause of Death” box for that substance should be checked. 
 
If multiple substances are identified with no indication as to which one caused the death of the victim, 
code all listed substances that are suspected of being involved as cause of death. When victims have 
been exposed to multiple toxic substances, data providers may not be able to determine which of them 
was primarily responsible for causing death. Therefore, this code accommodates the entry of multiple 
substances. Each substance is entered as a row in the toxicology table and there is no limit on the 
number of substances that can be entered. 
 
If a substance class (e.g., opioids) is listed as a contributing cause on the DC AND multiple substances in 
that substance class were identified by toxicology, the abstractor should check all of the substances in 
the substance class detected as a “Cause of Death.” For instance, heroin and oxycodone would be 
checked as “Cause of Death” if the substances were detected by toxicology testing and “opioid” was 
listed as a contributing cause of death on the DC. 
 
For substance overdose deaths where the only cause of death information listed on the DC and C/ME 
report is “Polysubstance,” “Poly drug,” “Multiple substances,” “Combined toxicity,” or another phrase 
implicating the involvement of multiple drugs, the abstractor should check “Cause of Death” for all 
substances that were detected by toxicology tests. 
 
 If, however, the cause of death indicates “substanc overdose,” “drug toxicity,” or something 
similar and only one substance is positive on post-mortem toxicology, the “Cause of Death” box 
should be checked for that substance. 
 
 
8.10 Person Prescribed for: DrugObtainedFor 
 
Definition:  
For prescription drugs, this describes the relationship between the victim and the person to whom the 
prescription medications were prescribed. 
 
Response Options: 
1 Self 
2 Intimate Partner 
3 Family (non-intimate partner) 
4 Other 
5 Not prescribed for decedent, unknown who prescribed for 
8 Not applicable (e.g., not a prescribed drug) 
===== Page 176 =====
 
Section 8. Toxicology Variables  176 | Page  
  
9 Relationship Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
This variable can be used to better understand how the victim or suspect obtained prescription 
medications. Please record the person for whom the drug(s) taken were prescribed. Over-the-counter 
medications are by definition not obtained through prescription and may be coded “Not applicable.” 
Each substance is entered as a row in the toxicology table and there is no limit on the number of 
substances that can be entered. 
 
The option “5 – Not Prescribed for decedent, unknown who prescribed for” should be endorsed when 
the substance is present on toxicology, but there is evidence that it was not prescribed to the decedent 
(and not enough evidence to indicate for whom it was prescribed, e.g., a prescription bottle with the 
label ripped off). 
 
The option “9 – Relationship Unknown” should be endorsed when the drug is present on toxicology, but 
records do not mention who the drug were prescribed for (so they could have been prescribed to the 
victim, but it is unclear). If there is uncertainty in the prescription relationship (e.g. either self or 
someone else), we recommend endorsing “Person Prescribed For” as “9 – Relationship Unknown” and 
including any prescription information in the narrative. 
 
 
8.11 Substance Categories: SubstanceClass  
 
Definition: 
Substance categories. 
 
Response Options:  (auto-populated) 
1 Alcohol 
2 Amphetamines 
3 Antidepressants 
4 Antipsychotics 
5 Benzodiazepines 
6 Barbiturates 
7 Cocaine 
8 Carbon Monoxide 
9 Marijuana 
10 Anticonvulsants 
11 Muscle Relaxants 
12 Opiates 
88 Not applicable 
 
Discussion:  
The substance category will match the name of the category in the toxicology summary when 
applicable. For drugs that do not fall into any of the summary categories, the category “Not applicable” 
will be displayed. Each substance is entered as a row in the toxicology table and there is no limit on the 
number of substances that can be entered. 
 
 
===== Page 177 =====
 
Section 8. Toxicology Variables  177 | Page  
  
8.12 Summary: Substances Tested For 
8.12.1 Tested for alcohol: AlcoholTested 
8.12.2 Tested for carbon monoxide: CarbonMonoxideTested 
8.12.3 Tested for amphetamine: AmphetamineTested 
8.12.4 Tested for anticonvulsants: AnticonvulsantTested 
8.12.5 Tested for Antidepressants: AntidepressantsTested 
8.12.6 Tested for Antipsychotics: AntipsychoticsTested 
8.12.7 Tested for barbiturates: BarbituratesTested 
8.12.8 Tested for benzodiazepines: BenzodiazepinesTested 
8.12.9 Tested for cocaine: CocaineTested 
8.12.10 Tested for marijuana: MarijuanaTested 
8.12.11 Tested for muscle relaxant: MuscleRelaxantTested 
8.12.12 Tested for opiate: OpiateTested  
 
Definition:  
Summary of substance results. 
 
Response Options: 
1 Tested 
0 Not tested 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
This set of variables identifies whether certain types of substance were tested for. This can help identify 
jurisdictions that routinely run toxicology tests on victims. 
 
Note: The following summary categories were added in August 2013: anticonvulsants, antipsychotics, 
barbiturates, benzodiazepines, and muscle relaxants. 
 
 
8.13 Summary: Results of Substances Tested For 
8.13.1 Alcohol results summary: AlcoholResult 
8.13.2 Carbon monoxide results summary: CarbonMonoxideResult 
8.13.3 Amphetamine results summary: AmphetamineResult 
8.13.4 Anticonvulsants results summary: AnticonvulsantResult 
8.13.5 Antidepressants results summary: AntidepressantsResut 
8.13.6 Antipsychotics results summary: AntipsychoticsResult 
8.13.7 Barbiturates results summary: BarbituratesResult 
8.13.8 Benzodiazepines results summary: BenzodiazepinesResult 
8.13.9 Cocaine results summary: CocaineResult 
8.13.10 Marijuana results summary: MarijuanaResult 
8.13.11 Muscle relaxant results summary: MuscleRelaxantResult 
8.13.12 Opiate results summary: OpiateResult  
 
Definition:  
Summary of substance results. 
 
Response Options: 
===== Page 178 =====
 
Section 8. Toxicology Variables  178 | Page  
  
1 Present 
2 Not present 
8  Not applicable (e.g., Testing was not done)  
9  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
This set of variables identifies whether the tests for various drugs or their metabolites were positive or 
negative. Findings can assist in exploring the relationship between drug use and violent death. The 
variables can also be used to document the presence of certain psychiatric medications among suicide 
victims in jurisdictions that test for these substances. If a test result for a substance was “Not tested” or 
“Unknown,” the program will automatically auto-fill the results for this variable as “Not applicable.” 
 
This information will be auto-populated based on the substances entered in the Toxicology Findings 
section. 
 
Note: The following summary categories were added in August 2013: anticonvulsants, antipsychotics, 
barbiturates, benzodiazepines, and muscle relaxants. 
 
 
8.14 Blood Alcohol Level: AlcoholLevel 
 
Definition: 
Blood alcohol level. 
 
Response Options:  
Please enter all three digits of the blood alcohol concentration (BAC), if available. Trailing zeroes are 
added for all values that are not three digits (e.g., .08 becomes .080). 
 
0.### Blood alcohol level in mg/dl 
0.010 BAC report indicates “trace” amounts without numeric value 
0.000 Below the detection limit of the test (“<0.01%” or “Non-detectable”)  
0.888 Not applicable, no testing 
0.999 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
These data will assist in exploring the relationship between alcohol intoxication and violent death when 
interpreted in conjunction with data on time of injury, time of death, and time at which body specimens 
were drawn. 
 
 Blood alcohol levels are coded in terms of percent by volume (serum %). Percent by volume equals 
the milligrams of alcohol found per deciliter of blood (mg/dl) divided by 1000. For example, a level 
of 30 mg/dl would be 0.030% alcohol. How labs report BAC varies. Many use the format used here 
(serum %), while others report BAC as milligrams of alcohol per deciliter of blood (mg/dl) — as in 30 
mg/dl. To convert mg/dl results to serum % results, divide by 1,000. Only BAC levels should be 
entered here; levels based on other body fluids such as vitreous fluid should not. Use caution when 
interpreting BAC levels because variation in the time elapsed between ingestion of substances, time 
of death, and time of drawing body specimens for toxicological analysis will affect the outcome. 
 BAC reported less than 0.01% should be interpreted as “Not present” in the alcohol test results 
===== Page 179 =====
 
Section 8. Toxicology Variables  179 | Page  
  
summary field and entered as 0.000 for this BAC variable. 
 Alcohol that appears in the blood as a result of decomposition rather than ingestion does not 
generally measure more than 0.040%. If source documents attribute a BAC level entirely to 
decomposition, do not record it. If source documents attribute it “partially” or “possibly” to 
decomposition, record it and add an appropriate note to the incident narrative. 
 BAC should only be entered for ethanol (e.g., alcohol, ethyl alcohol, or drinking alcohol) and not for 
other substances such as methanol.  
 
 
8.15 Carbon Monoxide Source: CarbonMonoxideSource 
 
Definition:  
Source of carbon monoxide. 
 
Response Options: 
1 Motorized vehicle (e.g., car, truck, bus, motorcycle, boat) 
2 Other 
3 Gas tool/appliance/heater 
4 Grill or barbeque (gas or charcoal, includes hibachi grills) 
5 Fire (e.g., house fire) 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
This information may be used to understand carbon monoxide sources to prevent suicides and 
homicides related to fire. 
 
 
8.16 Comments: ToxicologyComments 
 
Definition:  
Enter comments about substances or toxicology tests in this field, including substances not included in 
the substance look-up field. 
 
Response Option:  
Text 
 
Discussion: 
If a substance is not on the substance look-up table, please put the information in this field. Also, 
contact CDC (NVDRS-Coding@cdc.gov) so they can update the substance list. 
 
Note: This variable was added in August 2013.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
===== Page 180 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  180 | Page  
  
SECTION 9: CHILD FATALITY REVIEW OPTIONAL MODULE 
 
 
9.1.1 Witness(es) to fatal incident: CFR_Witness 
 
Definition:  
Were there any witnesses to the incident? 
 
Response Options: 
0  No 
1  Yes 
7  Not collected by reporting site  
8  N ot applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Witness(es) include any person(s) other than a suspect who was present and observed the incident that 
led to the child’s death. The caregiver can be considered a witness, but only if that person was not also 
the perpetrator. 
 
 
9.1.2 Child Witness(es) to fatal incident: CFR_ChildWitness 
 
Definition:  
Were there any child witnesses to the incident? 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1  Yes 
7  Not collected by reporting site  
8  Not applicable 
9  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
A child witness is defined as a person younger than 18 years of age who was present and observed the 
fatal incident. 
 
 
9.1.3 CFR additional information: CFR_AdditionalInformation 
 
Definition:  
Text field for describing additional relevant information provided by the CFR data source. 
 
Response Option:  
Text 
 
Discussion:  
===== Page 181 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  181 | Page  
  
As a text field, use this area to clarify circumstances surrounding the death that may not be clear from 
the CFR data elements or other NVDRS data sources. For example, unusual circumstances surrounding 
the death, household composition, supervision, or CFR committee decisions would be helpful in this text 
box. Also, coding options for several variables require further explanation in the incident narrative; that 
information should be included here. This box should only reflects unique information gathered from 
CFR, as it is a document-based system. 
 
 
9.1.4 CFR records available on victim: CFR_CFRRecordsAvailable 
 
Definition:  
Describes whether CFR records are available for this victim. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No 
1  Yes 
7  Not collected by local CFR team 
8  Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Code CFR_CFRRecordsAvailable as “No” if the records have been requested for a child victim and the 
CFR program either does not have a record for the victim or is unable to supply the record. 
 
 
9.1.5 Scene investigation by law enforcement/CME: CFR_SceneInvestigationLE/CME 
 
Definition:  
Describes whether or not there was a scene investigation conducted by law enforcement or the 
coroner/medical examiner. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1  Yes  
7  Unknown  
8  Not collected by local CFR team 
9 Not applicable 
 
Discussion:  
None  
 
 
9.2 Physical illness, Disability, Prenatal Variables  
 
 
9.2.1 Victim had a physical illness at time of incident: CFR_VictimPhysicalIllness 
9.2.2 If yes, specify diagnosis: CFR_Diagnosis 
===== Page 182 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  182 | Page  
  
 
Definitions: 
 VictimPhysicalIllness: Victim had an acute or chronic illness at the time of the incident. 
 Diagnosis: Free text field to indicate diagnosis if victim was ill at the time of the incident. 
 
Response Options:  
 VictimPhysicalIllness 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
 Diagnosis: Text 
 
Discussion: 
Physical illness may be acute (e.g., viral gastroenteritis, pneumonia) or chronic (e.g., diabetes, asthma, 
sickle cell anemia). 
 If the chronic illness did not impose increased care demands at the time of the incident, do not code 
“Yes.” 
 The severity of the illness should not be considered when coding CFR_VictimPhysicalIllness. 
 Any mention in the record of the victim being physically ill at the time of the incident is sufficient to 
warrant coding CFR_VictimPhysicalIllness as “Yes.” 
 Examples 
o For example, if a child had a history of asthma, but had no acute exacerbation at the time of 
the incident, code “No.” 
 
9.2.3 Victim had disability at time of incident: CFR_VictimDisability 
9.2.4 If yes, disability was physical: CFR_VictimDisabilityPhysical 
9.2.5 If yes, disability was developmental: CFR_VictimDisabilityDevelopmntal 
9.2.6 If yes, disability was sensory: CFR_VictimDisabilitySensory  
 
Definitions: 
 VictimDisability: Victim had a disability at the time of the incident. 
 VictimDisabilityPhysical: Victim’s disability was physical (e.g., paraplegic, cerebral palsy). 
 VictimDisabilityDevelopmntal: Victim’s disability was developmental (e.g., intellectual disability, 
autistic). 
 VictimDisabilitySensory: Victim’s disability was sensory (e.g., blind, deaf). 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not Available, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Physical disability implies a chronic physical impairment that has a substantial, long-term effect on the 
child’s day-to-day function (e.g., cerebral palsy, traumatic brain injury). Developmental disability implies 
a chronic cognitive or developmental deficit that has a substantial, long-term effect on the child’s day-
to-day function (as expressed by terms that may be found in source documents, such as autism, 
intellectual impairments, “mentally challenged,” “mental retardation,” “special needs,” etc.). Sensory 
disability implies a chronic sensory deficit that has a substantial, long-term impact on the child’s day-to-
day functioning (e.g., blindness, deafness). 
===== Page 183 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  183 | Page  
  
 
Prematurity in and of itself should not be considered an illness or a disability unless it resulted in a 
condition that fits into one of those categories (e.g., chronic lung disease, visual impairment). 
 
 Please see Prenatal History variables to code for prematurity. 
 If a child was not specifically diagnosed with or documented to have one of the listed disabilities, 
answer “No.” 
 The answer “No” may thereby include missing and unknown and “Known not to be present.” 
 The information used to complete this data element may come from parental history (as per LE 
reports or CPS records), medical records, and/or autopsy. 
 
 
9.2.7 Infants: Prenatal care prior to the 3rd trimester:  CFR_InfPrenatCarePri3rdTrim 
 
Definition:  
Victim’s (birth) mother received prenatal care prior to 3rd trimester. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Do not collect for victims one year of age or older. Prenatal care is defined as pregnancy-related medical 
care delivered by a doctor, nurse, or other healthcare professional with the goal of monitoring the 
pregnancy, providing education, and increasing the likelihood of a positive maternal and fetal outcome. 
Answer “Yes” only if there are documented prenatal visits before the third trimester.  
 
9.2.8 Infants: Maternal recreational drug use: CFR_InfantsMaternRecDrugUse  
9.2.9 Infants: Maternal alcohol use: CFR_InfantsMaternAlcoholUse  
9.2.10 Infants: Maternal tobacco use: CFR_InfantsMaternTobaccoUse 
 
Definitions: 
 CFR_InfantsMaternRecDrugUse: Victim was exposed to recreational drugs in utero. 
 CFR_InfantsMaternAlcoholUse: Victim was exposed to alcohol in utero. 
 CFR_InfantsMaternTobaccoUse: Victim was exposed to tobacco in utero. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Do not collect these items for victims one year of age or older. Prenatal care is defined as pregnancy-
===== Page 184 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  184 | Page  
  
related medical care delivered by a doctor, nurse, or other healthcare professional with the goal of 
monitoring the pregnancy, providing education, and increasing the likelihood of a positive maternal and 
fetal outcome. 
 
 Maternal recreational drug use includes all drugs (except alcohol and tobacco) that are either non-
prescription or are being used in a manner inconsistent with safe prescribing practices. 
 Answer “Yes” only if there is documented evidence or clear reports of substance, alcohol, or tobacco 
use during pregnancy with the victim. 
 Despite history of maternal substance, alcohol, and/or tobacco use with prior pregnancies, if it is not 
documented or evident during her pregnancy with the victim, the data element should be coded 
“No.” 
 
 
9.2.11 Infants: Victim born prematurely: CFR_InfantsBornPrematurely  
 
Definition:  
Victim was born prematurely. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Do not collect for victims one year of age or older. Prematurity is defined as an estimated gestational 
age less than 37 weeks. Code “Yes” if prematurity is listed in the source documents. 
 
 
9.3 CPS Report Variables 
 
 
9.3.1 Prior CPS report on the victim‘s household: CFR_PriorCPSReportVicHhold  
9.3.2 If yes, CPS report filed on whom: CFR_SexualAbuseReportedOn 
9.3.3 If yes, report substantiated: CFR_SexualAbuseReported  
 
Definitions: 
 CFR_PriorCPSReportVicHhold : Prior CPS report was filed on the victim’s household. 
 CFR_SexualAbuseReportedOn: Person on behalf of whom or against whom a CPS report was filed. 
 CFR_SexualAbuseReported: At least one prior CPS report filed on the victim’s household was 
substantiated. 
 
Response Options: 
 CFR_PriorCPSReportVicHhold   
 CFR_SexualAbuseReported 
0 No 
1 Yes 
===== Page 185 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  185 | Page  
  
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable  
9 Unknown 
 
 CFR_SexualAbuseReportedOn 
1 Victim 
2 Other child in household 
3 Both 
4 Adult in household 
6 Other, or unspecified 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
These variables refer to CPS  contacts prior to the current incident, and not contacts that resulted from 
the current case. “Household” is defined as the residence where the victim lived the majority of the time 
when the fatal incident occurred. Household was chosen as the unit for this question in an attempt to 
characterize the victim’s environment. 
 
 In the case of a victim living with a foster family or in an institution at the time of the fatal incident, 
answer regarding the family of origin. 
 If known maltreatment existed in the foster family, describe in incident narrative. Please note that a 
report or referral can be in reference to a child or an adult living in the household. 
 When the only information available is that a report was filed on the household, indicate 
“Unknown” for “CFR_SexualAbuseReportedOn.” 
 If a report was not made on behalf of a child in the household, but a report was filed against an 
adult who currently lives in the household (e.g., no reports against the victim’s mother, but the 
mother’s boyfriend was previously investigated for abuse), code “CFR_SexualAbuseReportedOn” as 
“adult in household.” 
 Any substantiation ever should be coded as “Yes” even if some of the reports/referrals were 
substantiated and others were not. 
 
 
9.3.4 CPS case opened on other children due to this death: CFR_CPSCaseOpened 
 
Definition:  
A CPS case was opened on other children in the victim’s household as a result of this death. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Refers to CPS contacts that resulted from the current case. “Household” is defined as the residence 
===== Page 186 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  186 | Page  
  
where the victim lived the majority of the time when the fatal incident occurred. Household was chosen 
as the unit for this question in an attempt to characterize the victim’s environment. 
 In the case of a victim living with a foster family or in an institution at the time of the fatal incident, 
answer regarding the family of origin. 
 If known maltreatment existed in the foster family, describe in incident narrative. Please note that a 
report or referral can be in reference to a child or an adult living in the household. 
 
 
9.4 Abuse/ Neglect Substantiation Variables 
 
 
9.4.1. Physical abuse substantiated: CFR_PhysicalAbuseSubstant 
9.4.2. Sexual abuse substantiated: CFR_SexualAbuseSubstant 
9.4.3. Neglect substantiated: CFR_NeglectSubstantiated  
 
Definitions: 
 CFR_PhysicalAbuseSubstant: At least one substantiated CPS report filed on the victim’s household 
was for physical abuse. 
 CFR_SexualAbuseSubstant: At least one substantiated CPS report filed on the victim’s household 
was for sexual abuse. 
 CFR_NeglectSubstantiated : At least one substantiated CPS report filed on the victim’s household 
was for neglect. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
These variables refer to CPS contacts prior to the current incident, and not contacts that resulted from 
the current case. “Household” is defined as the residence where the victim lived the majority of the time 
when the fatal incident occurred. Household was chosen as the unit for this question in an attempt to 
characterize the victim’s environment. 
 
 In the case of a victim living with a foster family or in an institution at the time of the fatal incident, 
answer regarding the family of origin. 
 If known maltreatment existed in the foster family, describe in incident narrative. Please note that a 
report or referral can be in reference to a child or an adult living in the household. 
 Any substantiation ever should be coded as “Yes” even if some of the reports/referrals were 
substantiated and others were not. 
 
 
9.5 Victim Contact with Formal System/Services 
 
 
9.5.1 Victim contact with Law enforcement: CFR_VictimContactPolice 
===== Page 187 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  187 | Page  
  
9.5.2 Victim contact with juvenile justice system: CFR_VictimContactJuvJusticeSys  
9.5.3 Victim contact with the health care system: CFR_VictimContactHlthCareSystem  
9.5.4 Victim contact with mental health services: CFR_VictimContactMentalHlthServ   
Definitions: 
 CFR_VictimContactPolice: Victim had contact with law enforcement in the past 12 
months. 
 CFR_VictimContactJuvJusticeSys: Victim had contact with juvenile justice system in the 
past 12 months. 
 CFR_VictimContactHlthCareSystem: Victim had contact with health care system in the 
past 12 months. 
 CFR_VictimContactMentalHlthServ: Victim had contact with mental health services in 
the past 12 months. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
These variables all refer to whether the child/victim had contact with these points in the system prior to 
the fatal incident. 
 
 
9.5.5 Household‘s contact with Law enforcement: CFR_HouseholdContactPolice 
 
Definition:  
Household had contact with law enforcement in the past 12 months. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
Refers to the household’s history of contact with law enforcement (e.g., law enforcement being called 
by neighbors secondary to domestic disturbance). 
 
 
9.5.6 Victim/primary caregiver contact with social services:CFR 
CFR_VicCaregiverContactSocServ  
9.5.7 Victim/primary caregiver contact with WIC: CFR_VicCaregiverContactWIC  
9.5.8 Victim/primary caregiver contact with Medicaid: CFR_VicCaregiverContactMedicaid  
 
Definitions: 
 CFR_VicCaregiverContactSocServ: Victim/primary caregiver had contact with social 
services in the past 12 months. 
 CFR_VicCaregiverContactWIC: Victim/primary caregiver had contact with WIC (Special 
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children) in the past 12 
===== Page 188 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  188 | Page  
  
months. 
 CFR_VicCaregiverContactMedicaid: Victim/primary caregiver had contact with  
Medicaid in the past 12 months. 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
These variables ask if either the child or the primary caregiver had contact with these points in the 
system in the year prior to the incident. The social services system can include health educator home 
visits or voluntary services, such as parenting support or respite services. 
 
 
9.5.9 Primary caregiver on welfare/financial assistance: CFR_CaregiverFinancialAssistance  
 
Definition:  
Primary caregiver was on welfare/financial assistance in the past 12 months. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
This variable refers to whether the primary caregiver of the victim was on welfare or receiving 
governmental financial assistance. 
 
 
9.6 Suspect Charge, Arrest, Etc. 
 
 
9.6.1 Specific person suspected: CFR_SuspectIdentified 
9.6.2 Suspect arrested as perpetrator in this death: CFR_SuspectArrested 
9.6.3 Suspect charged as perpetrator in this death: CFR_SuspectCharged 
9.6.4 Suspect prosecuted: CFR_SuspectProsecuted 
9.6.5 Suspect convicted: CFR_SuspectConvicted 
9.6.6 Suspect convicted of original charge: CFR_SuspConvictedOrigCharge  
9.6.7 CPS report or referral ever filed on the suspect: CFR_CPSReportReferralFiled 
9.6.8 Suspect ever charged with a prior homicide: CFR_SuspChrgedPriorHomicide   
 
Definition: 
 CFR_SuspectIdentified: Law enforcement identified the suspect by name. 
 CFR_SuspectArrested: Suspect was arrested as a perpetrator in this death. 
 CFR_SuspectCharged: Suspect was charged as a perpetrator in this death. 
 CFR_SuspectProsecuted: Suspect was prosecuted as a perpetrator in this death. 
 CFR_SuspectConvicted: Suspect was convicted as a perpetrator in this death. 
 CFR_SuspConvictedOrigCharge: Suspect was convicted of original charge. 
 CFR_CPSReportReferralFiled: Child Protective Service report had previously been filed 
===== Page 189 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  189 | Page  
  
on this suspect. 
 CFR_SuspChrgedPriorHomicide: Suspect had ever been charged with a prior 
homicide. 
 
Response Options: 
 CFR_SuspectIdentified  
 CFR_SuspectArrested  
 CFR_CPSReportReferralFiled  
 CFR_SuspChrgedPriorHomicide  
0 No 
1 Yes 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
 CFR_SuspectCharged 
 CFR_SuspectProsecuted 
0 No 
1 Yes  
3 Pending/In progress 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
 CFR_SuspectConvicted 
0 Acquitted 
1 Convicted 
3 Pending/In progress 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
  
 CFR_SuspectConvictedOriginalCharge 
0 No, convicted of lesser charge 
1 Yes, convicted of original charge 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Code “Yes” to SuspectIdentified if a specific person was identified by law enforcement as a suspect. 
 If law enforcement does not know the identity (i.e., name) of the suspect, or if they only have a 
physical description, code “No.” 
 When answering suspect arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted and convicted of original charge 
consider whether the suspect was arrested as a perpetrator in this death (i.e., not only charged with 
lesser offenses such as the possession of a firearm without a permit, or reckless endangerment). 
 CFR_CPSReportReferralFiled refers to a prior CPS report filed on the suspect as a perpetrator of 
===== Page 190 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  190 | Page  
  
child abuse or neglect. 
 CFR_SuspectChargedPriorHomicide refers to charges of homicide perpetration prior to this victim, 
regardless of outcome. Homicide in this case can be of an adult or child. 
 If “CFR_SuspectConvicted” is coded “Acquitted” or “Pending,” code 
“SuspectConvictedOriginalCharge” as “Not applicable.” 
 
 
9.7 Victim Household Characteristics 
 
 
9.7.1 Type of residence in which victim lived: CFR_ResidenceType 
9.7.2 Length of time in residence: CFR_ResidenceTimeIn 
9.7.3 Unrelated adult living in victim’s household: CFR_HouseholdAdultUnrelated 
9.7.4 Other children <18 years in household: CFR_OtherChildrenUndr18Household  
 
Definitions: 
 CFR_ResidenceType: Victim’s type of primary residence.  
 CFR_ResidenceTimeIn: Length of time in residence. 
 CFR_HouseholdAdultUnrelated: Unrelated adult living in victim’s household. 
 CFR_OtherChildrenUndr18Household: Presence of other children under 18 years living in the 
victim’s household. 
 
Response Options: 
 CFR_ResidenceType 
1 Victim’s family home 
2 Foster family home 
3 On own, e.g., living w boyfriend 
4 Residential group home 
5 Shelter 
6 Juvenile detention facility, jail, prison 
7 School/college 
66 Other 
77 Not collected by local reporting site 
88 Not applicable (homeless or adult) 
99 Unknown 
 
 CFR_ResidenceTimeIn 
0 One week or less 
1 Within the past month 
2 Within the past 6 months (but greater than one month) 
3 Between 6 months and 1 year 
4 Between 1 to 5 years 
5 More than 5 years 
6 Other 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
===== Page 191 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  191 | Page  
  
 CFR_HouseholdAdultUnrelated 
 CFR_OtherChildrenUndr18Household 
0 No 
1 Yes 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
These questions are to be asked of all child victims. Primary residence is the place where the victim lived 
the majority of the time when the incident occurred (not at the time of death if the residences were 
different). For example, if a child is injured in his or her own family home and dies four months later in 
the hospital, answer questions regarding his or her own family home. 
 
With regard to CFR_ResidenceType: “Victim’s family home” is defined as victim’s self-identified family 
where applicable; this may be biologic parents, other relatives, adoptive or stepparents. “On own” 
indicates that the decedent was living separately from his/her family (e.g., living with boyfriend or 
peers). If the victim was known to be moving from place to place without a permanent residence (i.e., 
“on the run”), or if the victim was a newborn who was still in the hospital, code as “Not applicable” and 
describe in the incident narrative. 
 
For length of time in residence, code the approximate length of time that the victim had been living at 
the residence indicated in “ResidenceType.” All time frames listed are with respect to the timing of the 
fatal incident. For example, if the victim was known to have come back to live with family of origin after 
foster care stay and dies by suicide within two weeks of returning, code “Within the past month.” 
 
“CFR_HouseholdAdultUnrelated” and “CFR_Other children <18 years in household” apply to children 
who lived with their own family, on their own, or with a foster family at the time of the fatal incident. An 
unrelated adult is defined as a person 18 years of age or older who was living in the household at the 
time of the incident, including primary caregivers (e.g., mother’s boyfriend, stepmother, friend of family, 
tenant, nanny, etc.). 
 Adoptive parents should not be considered unrelated. 
 If the victim lived in an institution (e.g., shelter, school, juvenile detention facility) at the time of the 
fatal incident, mark “Not applicable.” 
 If there were circumstances in the decedent’s household at the time of death that contributed to 
the child’s death, explain that separately in the incident narrative. 
 If a child is in a vegetative state secondary to shaken baby syndrome and dies of pneumonia three 
years later, answer “CFR_HouseholdAdultUnrelated” and “Other children <18 years in household” 
regarding the household at the time of the shaking. 
 If something about the quality of the child’s foster care at the time of death was also contributory to 
its death, note that in the incident narrative. 
 
 
9.7.5 Marital relationship of victim’s biological parents: CFR_VicBioParentMaritalRel  
 
Definition:  
Marital relationship of victim’s biological parents at the time of incident. 
 
===== Page 192 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  192 | Page  
  
Response Options: 
1 Married 
2 Never married 
3 Widowed 
4 Divorced 
5 Married, but separated 
6 Single, not otherwise specified 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Code the response option that best fits the marital relationship of the victim’s biological parents to one 
another at the time of the fatal incident. 
 
Example: 
 If the victim’s biological mother and father were never married, but the biological father was 
married to another woman at the time of the fatal incident, marital relationship should be coded as 
“Never married.” 
 
 
9.7.6 Intimate partner violence in victim‘s household: CFR_IPVVictimHousehold  
9.7.7 Intimate partner violence in victim‘s foster home: CFR_IPVVictimFosterHome 
 
Definitions: 
 CFR_IPVVictimHousehold: Evidence of intimate partner violence in victim’s household. 
 CFR_IPVVictimFosterHome: Evidence of intimate partner violence in victim’s foster family (if 
applicable). 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
These questions about intimate partner violence are to be asked about all children regarding their 
household at the time of the fatal incident. 
 
 For children who lived with their families or who were institutionalized (either temporarily or 
permanently), answer the questions regarding the family of origin. 
 For permanently institutionalized children with no family to return to, the answer will be “Not 
applicable.” 
 For children in foster care at the time of the fatal incident, answer the questions regarding both the 
foster home and the family of origin. 
 If there were circumstances in the decedent’s household at the time of death that contributed to 
the child’s death, explain that separately in the incident narrative. For example, if a child is in a 
===== Page 193 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  193 | Page  
  
vegetative state secondary to shaken baby syndrome and dies of pneumonia three years later, 
answer the following household questions regarding the time of the shaking. 
 However, if something about the quality of the child’s foster care at the time of death was also 
contributory to death, note that in the incident narrative. 
 
 
9.7.8 Substance abuse in victim‘s household: CFR_SubAbuseVictimHousehold  
9.7.9 Substance abuse in victim‘s foster home: CFR_SubAbuseVictimFosterHome  
 
Definitions: 
 CFR_SubAbuseVictimHousehold: Evidence of substance abuse in victim’s household. 
 CFR_SubAbuseVictimFosterHome: Evidence of substance abuse in victim’s foster family (if 
applicable). 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Substance abuse refers to all drugs (including alcohol) that are either non-prescription or being used in a 
manner inconsistent with safe prescribing practices. Questions are to be asked about all children 
regarding their household at the time of the fatal incident. 
 
 For children who lived with their families or who were institutionalized (either temporarily or 
permanently), the abstractor should answer the questions regarding the family of origin. 
 For permanently institutionalized children with no family to return to, the answer will be “Not 
applicable.” 
 For children in foster care at the time of the fatal incident, answer the questions regarding both the 
foster home and the family of origin. 
 In any kind of household, if the victim misused or abused substance(s) or had a substance abuse 
problem , but there was no indication that anyone else in the household did, code “No” for victim’s 
household and/or victim’s foster home. 
 However, if anyone else in the household was abusing substances, including other children younger 
than 18 years of age, code “Yes” for household and/or victim’s foster home. 
 If there were circumstances in the decedent’s household at the time of death that contributed to 
the child’s death, explain that separately in the incident narrative. For example, if a child is in a 
vegetative state secondary to shaken baby syndrome and dies of pneumonia three years later, 
answer the following household questions regarding the time of the shaking. 
 However, if something about the quality of the child’s foster care at the time of death was also 
contributory to death, note that in the incident narrative. 
 
 
9.8 Supervisor Characteristics 
 
 
===== Page 194 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  194 | Page  
  
9.8.1 Perpetrator was supervisor: CFR_SupervisorPerpetrator 
9.8.2 Quality of supervision a factor: CFR_SupervisorQuality 
9.8.3 Supervisor’s relationship to victim: CFR_SuperRelationshipVictim 
9.8.4 Supervisor’s age: CFR_SupervisorAge 
9.8.5 Supervisor’s sex: CFR_SupervisorSex 
9.8.6 No supervision: CFR_SupervisorNone 
9.8.7 Supervisor drug/alcohol impaired: CFR_SupervisorDrugAlcohlImpaired 
9.8.8 Supervisor distracted/asleep: CFR_SupervisorDistractedAsleep 
9.8.9 Other supervisory factor: CFR_SupervisorOther  
 
Definitions: 
 CFR_SupervisorPerpetrator: Perpetrator responsible for supervision at time of incident? 
 CFR_SupervisorQuality: Did the quality of supervision contribute to the death of the victim? 
 CFR_SuperRelationshipVictim: Relationship of supervisor to the victim.  
 CFR_SupervisorAge: Age of supervisor. 
 CFR_SupervisorSex: Sex of supervisor. 
 CFR_SupervisorNone: No supervision of the victim. 
 CFR_SupervisorDrugAlcohlImpaired: The supervisor was drug- or alcohol-impaired. 
 CFR_SupervisorDistractedAsleep: The supervisor was distracted or asleep. 
 CFR_SupervisorOther: Other supervisory factor contributed to victim’s death. 
 
Response Options: 
 CFR_SupervisorPerpetrator 
0 No 
1 Yes 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
 CFR_SupervisorQuality 
0 No, supervision was appropriate 
1 Yes, supervisor was not the perpetrator 
2 Yes, supervisor was the perpetrator 
3 Supervision not needed/expected 
4 CFRT could not determine 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
 CFR_SupervisorRelationshipVictim 
1 Primary caregiver 
2 Other adult relative 
3 Babysitter/childcare provider 
4 Primary caregiver’s boy/girlfriend 
5 Sibling/step-sibling 
6 Other, specify in incident narrative 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
===== Page 195 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  195 | Page  
  
9 Unknown 
 
 CFR_SupervisorAge 
Age of supervisor in years  
 
 CFR_SupervisorSex 
1 Male 
2 Female 
7  Not collected 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown  
 
 CFR_SupervisorNone  
 CFR_SupervisorDrugAlcohlImpaired  
 CFR_SupervisorDistractedAsleep 
 CFR_SupervisorOther 
0 No, Not collected by local CFR team, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
The supervisor is the person with the primary responsibility for the care and control of the child at the 
time of the fatal injury. If there were two supervisors at the time of the fatal incident, but one clearly 
had primary responsibility, code the person with the primary responsibility. If the responsibility of 
supervision was equally divided between two people, code the person whose supervision quality 
seemed most contributory to the child’s death. 
 
If the perpetrator/suspect was responsible for the victim’s direct supervision at the time of the incident 
(i.e., in the case of a homicide), then code CFR_SupervisorPerpetrator “Yes” and code the rest of the 
supervision variables as “Not applicable.” 
 
Determining supervision adequacy is purposefully left to the Child Fatality Review Team (CFRT) by this 
group of data elements. “CFR_SupervisorQuality” refers specifically to the quality of supervision at the 
time the fatal injury occurred, not to parenting style in general. “CFR_SupervisorNone” should be 
indicated if no arrangements for supervision were apparently made (e.g., leaving a 3-year-old 
unattended for half an hour). If an inappropriately young or old supervisor was appointed, specify the 
circumstances under “Other.” Any additional exceptional circumstances may be coded by endorsing 
“CFR_SupervisorOther” and including a description in the CFR incident narrative. All of the variables are 
based on the CFRT’s findings, even though the information to support the CFRT’s findings may well 
originate from multiple sources. 
 
If the quality of the supervision did not contribute to the child’s death (as determined by the CFRT) or it 
is unknown, code “No” or “Unknown” and the remainder of the supervisor variables as “Not applicable.” 
 
 
9.9 Caregiver Characteristics (1st and 2nd) 
 
 
9.9.1 Primary caregiver is a victim or suspect in the incident:   
===== Page 196 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  196 | Page  
  
 CFR_CaregiverVictimOrSuspect1/2 
9.9.2 If yes, caregiver‘s ID in the incident: CFR_CaregiverID1/2 
9.9.3 Relationship to victim: CFR_RelationshipToVictim1/2 
9.9.4 Person lived with victim: CFR_LivedWithVictim1/2 
9.9.5 Primary Caregiver’s Age at time of incident: CFR_AgeAtIncident1/2 
9.9.6 Primary Caregiver’s Sex: CFR_Sex1/2 
9.9.7 Had legal custody of victim at time of death: CFR_CustodyOfVictim1/2 
9.9.8 Had documented history of maltreating: CFR_HistoryOfMaltreating1/2 
9.9.9 Had a previous child die in his/her care: CFR_PreviousChildDie1/2 
 
Definitions (refers to 1st and 2nd primary caregivers): 
 CFR_CaregiverVictimOrSuspect1/2: Is the victim’s primary caregiver a victim or suspect in the 
incident? 
 CFR_CaregiverID1/2: Caregiver’s Person ID in the incident.  
 CFR_RelationshipToVictim1/2: Caregiver’s relationship to the victim. 
 CFR_LivedWithVictim1/2: Caregiver lived with victim at the time of the incident?  
 CFR_AgeAtIncident1/2: Age of Caregiver at the time of the incident. 
 CFR_Sex1/2: Sex of Caregiver. 
 CFR_CustodyOfVictim1/2: Caregiver had legal custody of victim at time of death?  
 CFR_HistoryOfMaltreating1/2: Caregiver had documented history of maltreating a child. 
 CFR_PreviousChildDie1/2: Caregiver had a previous child die in his/her care? 
 
Response Options: 
 CFR_CaregiverVictimOrSuspect1/2  
0 No 
1 Victim or victim/suspect 
2  Primary suspect 
3 Secondary suspect 
4 Other suspect 
7 Unknown 
8 Not collected by CFR team 
9 Not applicable 
 
 CFR_LivedWithVictim1/2  
 CFR_CustodyOfVictim1/2  
 CFR_HistoryOfMaltreating1/2 
 CFR_PreviousChildDie1/2 
0 No 
1 Yes 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
 CFR_CaregiverID 
Number of the Person in the incident  
 
 CFR_AgeAtIncident  
Age of caregiver in years  
===== Page 197 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  197 | Page  
  
 
 CFR_Sex 
1 Male 
2 Female 
9 Unknown 
 
 CFR_RelationshipToVictim 
1 Biologic parent 
2 Stepparent 
3 Adoptive parent 
4 Other relative 
5 Parent’s intimate partner 
6 Other non-relative 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
The victim’s primary caregiver is defined as the person or persons (up to two) who had responsibility for 
the care, custody, and control of the child the majority of the time. 
 The primary caregiver(s) may be the child’s parent or parents (biological, step, adoptive parents) or 
another relative. 
 If the child was living with his/her biological or adoptive parents, assume that they were the primary 
caregivers and had legal custody of the decedent unless otherwise specified in the records. 
 The primary caregiver(s) may also be the state CPS agency/foster parent(s) or another institution in 
some cases. 
 In the instances when the child is residing in foster care or an institution, complete this information 
for the primary caregiver(s) in the family of origin if known (not for the foster family or institutional 
caregivers). 
 In the case of neonaticide, assume that the biological mother was the primary caregiver unless there 
is evidence that another person (e.g., father, grandmother) had assumed control of the child as a 
caregiver at the time of the incident. 
 If the primary caregiver(s) at the time of death was different from the primary caregiver(s) at the 
time of the incident, answer regarding the primary caregiver(s) at the time of the incident. 
 For example, if a baby is shaken by its biological mother as an infant and survives in a vegetative 
state in foster care until three years of age, code the biological mother. 
 “Documented history of child maltreatment” indicates a substantiated CPS report/referral or rights 
termination. 
 
 
9.10 Records Consulted in CFRT Review 
 
 
9.10.1 CME records: CFR_RecordCME 
9.10.2 SS/CPS records: CFR_RecordSSCPS 
9.10.3 Law enforcement/Law enforcement records: CFR_RecordPoliceLE 
9.10.4 School records: CFR_RecordSchool 
9.10.5 EMS records: CFR_RecordEMS 
===== Page 198 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  198 | Page  
  
9.10.6 Health Provider/Hospital records: CFR_RecordHealthProviderHospital 
9.10.7 Public Health Department records: CFR_RecordPublicHealthDepartment 
9.10.8 Mental Health Records: CFR_RecordMentalHealth 
9.10.9 Juvenile Justice Records: CFR_RecordJuvenileJustice 
9.10.10 Death Certificate: CFR_RecordDeathCertificate 
9.10.11 Other records: CFR_RecordOther 
9.10.12 Specify (what other records): CFR_RecordOtherText 
 
Definition:  
Records from each agency indicated were consulted in the CFRT review of victim’s death. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No, Not collected by local CFR team, Unknown 
1 Yes 
 
CFR_RecordOtherText 
Text 
 
Discussion:  
The primary data sources used to review a child death vary from CFR program to program and often 
from death to death. Code the data source as “Yes” if the records were consulted about the death, even 
if the given agency ended up having no information about the victim. Do not code a source as “Yes” if 
the only information gathered was secondary (e.g., the DSS records indicate that law enforcement 
performed an investigation, but the actual LE reports were not consulted). 
 
 
9.10.13 History of inpatient psychiatric treatment: CFR_HistoryPsychiatricTreatment 
9.10.14 Taking psychiatric medication at time of death: CFR_PsychiatricMedication 
9.10.15 Barriers to accessing mental health care: CFR_BarriersAccessMntlHealthCare  
 
Definitions: 
 CFR_HistoryPsychiatricTreatment: Victim has ever been treated as an inpatient for psychiatric 
problems. 
 CFR_PsychiatricMedication: Victim had a current prescription for a psychiatric medication at the 
time of the incident. 
 CFR_BarriersAccessMntlHealthCare: Victim experienced barriers to accessing mental health care 
(applicable only to victims coded as having a mental health problem and not being in treatment). 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
 
Discussion:  
These variables will provide more in depth information about mental health treatment for children who 
die by suicide than is currently collected by the main reporting system for adult victims. 
 
 These variables supplement the basic Suicide Circumstances related to mental health. Indicate that 
the child received inpatient psychiatric care if there is a documented history of inpatient psychiatric 
===== Page 199 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  199 | Page  
  
treatment ever, not just at the time of death. These includes an overnight or longer stay at a 
psychiatric hospital or institution, psychiatric halfway house or group home, or psych unit within an 
acute care hospital. 
 PsychiatricMedication refers to whether the patient had an active prescription for psychiatric 
medication at the time of death. They need not have actually been taking the medication. When 
available, toxicology results will help assess whether the decedent was taking the medication 
prescribed 
 If a child victim was noted as having a mental health problem and as not being in mental health 
treatment, the CFR_BarriersAccessMntlHealthCare variable will document whether any evidence in 
the record indicates that the victim encountered barriers in accessing mental health treatment. 
o Code “Yes” if there were specific obstacles or if it was known that treatment was either 
recommended by a health professional and/or identified by the family yet care was not 
received. Examples of specific obstacles include lack of insurance coverage, transportation 
problems, or long waiting lists. Another example would be parental awareness of their 
child’s suicidal ideation, but inability to establish care because of immigration status. 
o Please describe the nature of the barrier in the Incident Narrative. 
 
 
9.11 CFR Concluding Variables 
 
 
9.11.1 CFR conclusion matches Death Certificate: CFR_CFRConclusionMatchedDC 
9.11.2 If no, manner the CFR designated: CFR_CFRDesignated 
9.11.3 Text to specify other manner: CFR_MannerOther 
9.11.4 Action taken to change the official manner: CFR_ActionChgOfficialManner 
9.11.5 Result of action: CFR_ResultOfAction 
9.11.6 CFR determination of preventability: CFR_DeathPreventability 
 
Definitions: 
 CFR_CFRConclusionMatchedDC: Did the CFR designation of the child’s manner of death match the 
DC manner? 
 CFR_CFRDesignated: Manner of death designated by the CFR 
 CFR_MannerOther: Text field for CFR manner of death if “other” 
 CFR_ActionChgOfficialManner: If CFR designation did not match DC manner, was action taken by 
the CFR to change the manner of death? 
 CFR_ResultOfAction: Result of action taken by the CFR to change the manner of death 
 CFR_DeathPreventability: CFR conclusions regarding the preventability of the death 
 
Response Options:  
 CFR_CFRConclusionMatchedDC 
 CFR_ActionChgOfficialManner 
0 No  
1 Yes 
7 Not collected/CFR team does not make this comparison 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
 CFR_CFRDesignated 
===== Page 200 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  200 | Page  
  
1 Natural 
2 Accident 
3 Suicide 
4 Homicide 
5 Pending investigation 
6 Could not be determined 
66 Other 
77 Not collected/CFR team does not designate manner 
88 Not applicable 
99 Unknown 
 
 CFR_MannerOther 
Text 
 
 CFR_ResultOfAction 
0 No change 
1 Manner changed to agree with CFRT 
3 Pending 
6 Other 
7 Not collected by local CFR team 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
 CFR_DeathPreventability 
0 Probably not preventable 
1 Possibly preventable 
2 Unable to determine preventability 
7 Not collected/CFR team does not determine preventability 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
The CFRT’s conclusions are being compared with the officially-designated manner of death as originally 
specified on the DC (or, if the DC was unavailable to the committee at the time of their review, the C/ME 
report). 
 Code CFR_CFRConclusionMatchedDC as “Yes” if the CFRT’s manner of death matched the manner 
of death originally designated on the DC. 
 Code CFR_CFRConclusionMatchedDC as “No” if the CFRT determined that the manner of death was 
something other than that assigned in the DC data. 
 Supply the manner chosen by the CFRT in CFR_CFRDesignated. “Could not be determined” under 
CFR_CFRDesignated refers to the affirmative designation of undetermined as the CFRT’s manner of 
death. 
 “Unknown” is to be used if the information is not available at the time of data entry. Please use the 
text box to explain coding “Other” for CFR_CFRDesignated. 
 CFR_ActionChgOfficialManner and ResultOfAction will be enabled only if 
CFR_CFRConclusionMatchedDC is coded as “No.” 
 Some CFRTs designate the degree to which a child’s death was preventable (e.g., “definitely 
preventable,” “probably preventable,” “probably not preventable,” etc.). Respondents should 
===== Page 201 =====
 
Section 9. Child Fatality Review Optional Module  201 | Page  
  
collapse the levels they use to answer the question as “Probably not preventable,” “Possibly 
preventable,” or “Unable to determine.” If the teams indicate any possibility of prevention then 
code “Possibly preventable.” “Unable to determine preventability” is an affirmative designation (i.e., 
it is specifically noted on the CFRT form) otherwise, code “Unknown.” 
===== Page 202 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 202 | Page  
  
SECTION 10: INTIMATE PARTNER VIOLENCE OPTIONAL MODULE 
 
This module allows states to capture additional information on homicide incidents classified as intimate   
partner violence (IPV) incidents. IPV incidents are defined as incidents in which violence or the threat of 
violence by a person against his or her current or former intimate partner (IP) results in the violent 
death of one or more people. This may involve cases in which there is a death of a third party that is 
directly linked to the IP relationship (e.g., the child of the IP, friend of the victim, a bystander). 
 
 
10.1 Definition of Intimate Partner 
 
For all intimate partner-related variables intimate partner ±is defined as a current or former 
girlfriend/boyfriend, dating partner, ongoing sexual partner, or spouse. It DOES NOT include instances of 
sex/intimacy in exchange for money/goods. There must be evidence of an intimate relationship (this does 
not apply to instances where there is simply attraction/infatuation between two individuals or in cases 
where one person is romantically interested in the other, but the feelings are not returned).  The 
definition of intimate partner does not require sexual intimacy. This definition includes same-sex 
partners.  
 
±. This definition is based on the CDC/National Center for Injury Prevention and Control standard 
definition of Intimate Partner Violence.   
 
Source: http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/ipv_surveillance_definitions.pdf 
 
 
10.1.1 IPV Incident Type: IPV_IncidentType 
 
Definition:  
Type of IPV homicide incident.  
 
Response Options: 
1 Type 1: IPV 
2 Type 2: IPV-Related 
3 Type 3: IP-Associated 
4 Other (specify) 
99 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
The Incident Type IPV should be determined using LE reports or other available information on the 
relationship history of the IPs. The IPV module is designed to collect information on IPs and the 
circumstances that contributed to the violent death. The following categories should be used for coding 
the incident type: 
 
Type 1: Incidents in which an individual is killed by a current or former intimate partner. (Other persons 
may also be involved in the NVDRS incident, as either victims or suspects. The IPV Module should only 
be completed for the actual IPs.) 
 
Type 1 Case Examples 
===== Page 203 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 203 | Page  
  
 A woman’s ex-boyfriend walks up to the woman and shoots her on the street. 
 A man and woman are out on their first date. They go back to her apartment after the date. The 
man tries to force the women into bed and strangles her to death. 
 A woman and her lawyer are getting into a car; the woman’s ex-boyfriend walks up to the woman 
and shoots her and the lawyer (the lawyer is an NVDRS victim but would not have the IPV module 
completed). 
 
Type 2 and Type 3 incidents do not involve a person killing a current or former IP but do include a 
homicide that is directly related to a current or former intimate relationship. That is, the homicide would 
not have occurred in the absence of the IP relationship. Type 2: IPV-Related: Incidents that do not meet 
the definition of Type 1, but where the homicide is directly related to violence in the intimate 
relationship. For Type 2 incidents, the IPV module should be completed for the IPs, not the third party. 
 
Type 2 Case Examples 
 A woman kills her ex-husband's new wife. The suspect has a history of previously threatening her ex-
husband. 
 A man confronted, and then killed, another man he believed was having an affair with his girlfriend. 
The suspect had a history of physically assaulting his girlfriend and had told her on multiple 
occasions that he would kill her if she was ever with anybody else. 
 A husband shoots and kills his child while attempting to attack his wife during an argument. 
 
Type 3: IP-Associated: Incidents that do not meet the definition of Type 1, but where the homicide is 
directly related to an intimate partner relationship, and there is no evidence of violence in the IP 
relationship itself. The homicide can be committed by or against any of the third parties involved but 
must involve at least one of the IPs as the victim or the suspect. For Type 3 incidents, the IPV module 
should be completed for the IPs, not the third party. 
 
Type 3 Case Examples 
 A man sees another man flirting with his wife in a bar; the two men argue and one stabs the other to 
death. No evidence of previous violence or threats between the man and wife. 
 A grandmother is murdered by her teenage granddaughter and her granddaughter’s lover because 
the grandmother was trying to keep the two young women apart. 
 A man shot his landlord to death. In his confession, the suspect stated that the landlord habitually 
touched or made sexual comments about his (the suspect’s) wife and that he got tired of it. 
 
 
10.1.2 IPV Victim: IPV_Victim 
10.1.3 IPV Perpetrator: IPV_Perpetrator 
 
Definitions: 
 IPV_IPV Victim: Identification of whether the IPV Victim is the NVDRS Suspect, Victim, or neither. 
 IPV_IPV Perpetrator: Identification of whether the IPV Perpetrator is the NVDRS Suspect, Victim, or 
neither. 
 
Response Options: 
1 NVDRS Suspect 
2 NVDRS Victim 
3 Both NVDRS Suspect and Victim 
===== Page 204 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 204 | Page  
  
4 Neither NVDRS Suspect nor Victim 
99 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
For this module, the terms IPV Victim and IPV Perpetrator are used to identify persons on whom 
information is collected as opposed to victim and suspect as are used in the general NVDRS. These 
elements identify the role that the IPV Victim and IPV Perpetrator had in the homicide incident. The 
definitions for IPV Victim and IPV Perpetrator terms are as follows: 
 
The IPV Victim is the partner in the intimate relationship who is the target of violence perpetrated by 
his/her IP. This person may be the victim, suspect, or neither in the NVDRS. In cases of mutually 
combative violence where the target of the violence cannot be determined, the IPV Victim should be 
listed as the partner who was killed. Coders should list the NVDRS identification number for the 
individual listed as the IPV Victim. 
 
The IPV Perpetrator is the partner in the intimate relationship who has committed violence against 
his/her IP. This person may be the victim, suspect, or neither in the NVDRS. Coders should list the 
NVDRS person identification number for the individual listed as the IPV Perpetrator. 
 
 
10.2 Data Sources Used to Complete Module 
 
 
10.1 Death Certificate: IPV_SourceDeathCertificate 
10.2 CME Report: IPV_SourceCME 
10.3 Law enforcement report: IPV_SourcePoliceReport 
10.4 SHR or NIBRS Data: IPV_SourceSHRorNIBRS 
10.5 Crime Lab Report: IPV_SourceLab 
10.6 Gun Trace Report: IPV_SourceGunTrace 
10.7 Hospital/ED Report: IPV_SourceHospitalEmergencyRoom 
10.8 Court or Prosecutor Records: IPV_SourceDistrictAttorney 
10.9 Restraining Order Records: IPV_SourceRestrainingOrder 
10.10 Criminal History Database: IPV_SourceCriminalHistory 
10.11 DVFRT Report: IPV_SourceDomestViolFatalRevTeam 
10.12 Newspaper Reports: IPV_SourceNews 
10.13 Other Data Sources: IPV_SourceOther 
 
Definition:  
Indicator of whether each of the above record types was used as a data source to complete module. 
 
Response Options: 
0 Data source not used 
1 Data source used 
 
Discussion: 
Select all of the data sources used by the coder to complete the IPV data module. The following should 
be coded as “data source used” if the sources were used the complete the module:  
 
===== Page 205 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 205 | Page  
  
IPV_SourceDeathCertificate (death certificate);  
IPV_SourceCME (medical examiner, coroner report, or toxicology report);  
IPV_SourcePoliceReport (law enforcement report); 
IPV_SourceSHRorNIBRS (data from the FBI’s Supplementary Homicide Reports or National 
Incident Based Reporting Reports);  
IPV_SourceLab (crime laboratory reports); 
IPV_SourceGunTrace (gun trace data);  
IPV_SourceHospicalEmergencyRoom (Hospital records including hospital discharge and 
emergency department records);  
IPV_SourceDistrictAttorney (prosecution or court records);  
IPV_SourceRestrainingOrder (national or state restraining order databases);  
IPV_SourceCriminalHistory (national or state criminal history databases); 
IPV_SourceDomestViolFatalRevTeam (Domestic Violence Fatality Review Team report);  
IPV_SourceNews (newspaper article or other print media source); and  
IPV_SourceOther (specify any other sources used). 
 
 
10.3 Evidence of Premeditation: IPV_Premeditated 
 
Definition:  
Homicide appears to have involved premeditation or advance planning. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
Evidence of premeditation includes signs such as the suspect’s lying in wait for the victim(s) or taking 
precautions before the incident to avoid discovery. Most state laws differentiate levels of homicide, with 
homicide in the first degree involving premeditation or malice aforethought, and other homicide 
charges (homicide in the second degree, country manslaughter) showing no evidence of premeditation.  
 
Examples 
 Yes 
o Suspect arrived at the victim’s house with two handguns and extra clips. 
o Suspect was waiting outside the victim’s workplace; when she arrived, he shot her. 
o Suspect was aware of when her husband was meeting with his lawyer; she arrived at the 
office and shot both. 
o Suspect was charged with first degree murder. 
 
 
10.4 Homicide during argument: IPV_HomicideDuringArgument  
 
Definition:  
Homicide occurred in the midst of an argument or altercation. 
 
Response Options: 
===== Page 206 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 206 | Page  
  
0  No 
1  Yes 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
It is difficult to ascertain whether a homicide was impulsive; this variable instead captures objective 
information about whether a verbal altercation of some sort immediately preceded the homicide. 
Although some of these cases may also involve advance planning (e.g., suspect lies in wait for the victim 
armed with a weapon and intending to kill him; upon seeing him, they argue, she produces the weapon 
and shoots him), the variable is likely to serve as a rough proxy for more impulsive homicides (see also 
“Premeditation” on the previous page). This information will frequently be unknown. Legally, 
differentiating homicides involving premeditation versus those occurring in the “heat of passion” is a 
major point as this distinction, in part, informs whether the suspect is charged with homicide in the first 
degree, homicide in the second degree, or manslaughter. 
 
Examples 
 Yes 
o Husband and wife had been drinking during a party; after the guests left, they began arguing 
and wife stabbed husband. 
o Victim told suspect that she wanted him out of the apartment; he became angry and beat 
her to death. 
 No 
o Victim and sister were sitting in the moving van when victim’s husband pulled alongside the 
vehicle and shot her. 
o Suspect shot the victim while she was sleeping and then shot himself. 
 
 
10.5 During child drop-off/pick-up: IPV_ChildrenDropoffPickup 
 
Definition:  
Homicide occurred during drop-off or pick-up of children. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1  Yes 
9  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
This variable refers to those periods of overlap when one partner in a couple sharing custody of children 
is picking up or dropping off children to or from the other partner or a court-supervised visit. 
 
 
10.6 Suspect Legal Actions 
 
 
10.6.1 Warrant issued for suspect: IPV_SuspectWarrant 
10.6.2 Suspect arrested in this incident: IPV_SuspectedArrested 
10.6.3 Suspect arrested but fled: IPV_SuspectFled 
===== Page 207 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 207 | Page  
  
10.6.4 Suspect charged as perpetrator: IPV_SuspectCharged 
10.6.5 Suspect convicted: IPV_SuspectConvicted 
10.6.6 Suspect convicted of original charge: IPV_SuspectConvictedOrigCharge 
10.6.7 Suspect died following incident: IPV_SuspectDied 
 
Definitions: 
 IPV_SuspectWarrant: Warrant issued for the suspect in this incident.  
 IPV_SuspectedArrested: Suspect arrested in this incident. 
 IPV_SuspectFled: Suspect arrested but fled while on bond or escaped custody. 
 IPV_SuspectCharged: Suspect charged in this incident. 
 IPV_SuspectConvicted: Suspect convicted in this incident. 
 IPV_SuspectConvictedOrigCharge: Suspect convicted of the original charge. 
 IPV_SuspectDied: Suspect died following the incident. 
 
Response Options: 
 IPV_SuspectWarrant  
 IPV_SuspectedArrested 
 IPV_SuspectFled 
0  No 
1 Yes 
7  Not collected in data sources 
8  Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
 IPV_SuspectCharged 
 IPV_SuspectConvicted 
 IPV_SuspectConvictedOrigCharge 
0 No 
1  Yes 
3  Pending/In progress 
7  Not collected in data sources  
8  Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
 IPV_SuspectDied 
0 No 
1 Yes  
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Code variables with reference to the intimate partner who was arrested, charged, prosecuted, etc. as a 
suspect for the death. Arrests or prosecution on lesser charges only, such as possession of a firearm 
without a license or other unrelated charges, should not trigger endorsing these variables. If the 
individual died following the incident then the other information does not have to be completed. 
 
 IPV_SuspectWarrant indicates that a warrant was issued for the arrest of the suspect in the 
incident. Code as “Yes” if a warrant for the suspect’s arrest has been issued. 
 IPV_SuspectedArrested indicates that the suspect was arrested by law enforcement. If a suspect is 
===== Page 208 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 208 | Page  
  
arrested, the arrest record will indicate the criminal statutes the person is suspected of having 
violated (e.g., first-degree homicide, second-degree homicide, etc.). If the suspect has not been 
arrested, or if the arrest charges do not include perpetration of the victim’s death, code as “No.” 
Also code as “No” if a warrant for the suspect’s arrest has been issued but the arrest has not yet 
been made. 
 IPV_SuspectFled indicates that the suspect was arrested by law enforcement as a suspected 
perpetrator in the victim’s death; however, the suspect fled while on bond or escaped from custody 
prior to any closure to the case. 
 IPV_SuspectCharged indicates that a prosecutor such as the district attorney or federal prosecutor 
issued charges against the suspect. These charges are not to be confused with the initial charges on 
which law enforcement arrested a suspect. Rather, they refer to the charges filed by the prosecutor 
that initiated the prosecution process. If the records reflect that the suspect is being prosecuted, 
code as “Yes.” Reasons to endorse “No” include that the case was never presented to prosecutors, 
the suspect was administratively released by law enforcement prior to charging (which means that 
the law enforcement no longer consider the person a suspect and s/he can be dropped as a suspect 
from the incident), or the prosecutor did not issue charges (because of lack of evidence, witness 
difficulties, defendant granted immunity, jurisdictional problem, constitutional defects, or physical 
evidence difficulty). 
 IPV_SuspectConvicted: If prosecution is complete, this indicates whether the IPV Victim or 
Perpetrator suspect was convicted as a perpetrator in the victim’s death. Code “No” if the IPV 
Perpetrator or Victim was acquitted or the case was dismissed. Also code “No” if the IPV Perpetrator 
or Victim was convicted only of lesser charges (e.g., a weapons charge) but not as a perpetrator in 
the victim’s death (e.g., convicted of homicide, murder, or manslaughter). Assume the IPV 
Perpetrator or Victim has been convicted if she/he has been sentenced or is awaiting sentencing. 
 IPV_SuspectConvictedOrigCharge: If the IPV Victim or Perpetrator/suspect was convicted of a lesser 
charge and not the original charge (e.g., charged with first degree murder but convicted of second 
degree), code as “No.” 
 IPV_SuspectDied: If the IPV Victim or Perpetrator/suspect died at any time during the legal 
proceedings. 
 
 
10.7 Cohabitation Status: IPV_CohabitationStatus 
 
Definition:  
Cohabitation status of the IPV Perpetrator and IPV Victim at the time of the incident, i.e., living together 
in the same household, irrespective of marital status. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1  Yes 
9  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
If indication is provided through LE reports or other data sources that the IPV Perpetrator and IPV Victim 
shared a primary residence at the time of the incident, then “CohabitationStatus” should be coded as 
“Yes.” If the IPV Perpetrator and IPV Victim are listed as having the same address and there is no 
information contrary about their having separated, code as “Yes” even in the absence of an affirmative 
statement about cohabitation status. If the IPV Perpetrator and IPV Victim lived together fairly 
===== Page 209 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 209 | Page  
  
consistently, but there had been a recent change of status (e.g., less than 1 week of living in separate 
households) or they have separate addresses, then “CohabitationStatus” should still be coded as “Yes.” 
For example, if it was reported that an IPV Victim had been staying with her parents for a few days or 
the IPV Victim had a separate mailing address, but primarily resided with the IPV Perpetrator, they 
should be coded as cohabitating. 
 
 
10.8 Relationship length number of units: IPV_RelationshipLength 
10.9 Unit of time used in relationship length: IPV_RelationshipLengthUOM 
 
Definitions: 
 IPV_RelationshipLength: Length of time the IPV Perpetrator and IPV Victim were involved in a 
romantic relationship. 
 IPV_RelationshipLengthUOM: Unit of time for IPV Perpetrator and IPV Victim involvement in a 
romantic relationship. 
 
Response Options: 
 IPV_RelationshipLength 
888  Not applicable 
999  U nknown 
 
 IPV_RelationshipLengthUOM 
1 Years 
2 Months 
3 Days 
4 Hours 
9  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
This variable provides information on the length of time the IPV Perpetrator and IPV Victim were 
involved in a romantic relationship. This time period should be estimated from information drawn from 
C/ME or LE reports. It should reflect the total time the couple have been in a relationship and not just, in 
the case of married couples, the length of the marriage. 
 
It is coded using a numerical indication of the number of years, months, weeks, and days the 
relationship lasted. First the coder should provide information on the unit that best describes the 
amount of time of the IPV Perpetrator and IPV Victim relationship in terms of years, months, or less than 
one month. Indicate the length of the romantic relationship in IPV_RelationshipLength and the units of 
measurement for the interval (e.g., hours, days, weeks) in IPV_RelationshipLengthUOM. 
 
For any length that is 47 hours or less, use hours; for 48 hours and to 29 days, use days. For 30 or more 
days, the abstractor should use months. For 12 or more months, use years. Round to the nearest unit 
(e.g., 1 hour and 35 minutes would be recorded as 2 hours). If relationship length was noted as a range, 
use the high end of the range (e.g., 15–29 days, use 29). If relationship length is not precisely noted, 
indicate “999” in “RelationshipLength” and the applicable unit in “IPV_RelationshipLengthUOM” (e.g., 
“couple dated for a few days” would be “999” in “IPV_RelationshipLength” and “3” in 
“IPV_RelationshipLengthUOM”). 
 
===== Page 210 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 210 | Page  
  
 
10.9 Relationship Break-Up 
 
 
10.9.1 Breakup or breakup in progress: IPV_RelationshipBreakup 
10.9.2 Breakup length number of units: IPV_BreakupLength 
10.9.3 Unit of time used in breakup length: IPV_BreakupLengthUOM 
 
Definitions: 
 IPV_RelationshipBreakup: Indication of a breakup or in-process breakup of IPV Perpetrator and IPV 
Victim. 
 IPV_BreakupLength: Unit of time for IPV Perpetrator and IPV Victim breakup. 
 IPV_BreakupLengthUOM: IPV Perpetrator and IPV Victim relationship breakup length. 
 
Response Options:  
 IPV_RelationshipBreakup 
0  No, there was no indication of a breakup between the IPV Perpetrator and IPV Victim   
1  No, a breakup was threatened by the IPV Perpetrator or IPV Victim but did not happen  
2     Yes, a breakup occurred immediately preceding or during the incident 
3 Yes, a breakup occurred at some point prior to the incident but not during or immediately 
preceding the incident 
9  Unknown 
 
 IPV_BreakupLength 
88  Not applicable 
99  Unknown 
 
 IPV_BreakupLengthUOM 
1 Years 
2 Months  
3 Weeks 
4 Days 
5 Hours 
8 Not applicable 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
These variables provide information drawn from C/ME or LE reports that provide information whether a 
breakup occurred or was occurring between the IPV Perpetrator and IPV Victim. 
 IPV_RelationshipBreakup should be coded as “Yes” if there is information in the reports indicating 
the IPV Perpetrator and IPV Victim had broken up or were in the process of breaking up. This should 
include cases in which the partners recently divorced or one of the partners filed for divorce or 
threatened divorce. 
 IPV_BreakupLengthUOM and IPV_BreakupLength time period should be estimated from 
information drawn from C/ME or LE reports. It is coded using a numerical indication of the number 
of years, months, weeks, and days of how long ago the breakup occurred. First, the coder should 
provide information on the unit that best describes the amount of time that has passed since the 
IPV Perpetrator and IPV Victim breakup in terms of years, months, or less than one month. This is 
===== Page 211 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 211 | Page  
  
then followed by the number that best describes the time length of the breakup. If the IPV 
Perpetrator and IPV Victim relationship is described as having numerous breakups, the length 
should be measured using the most recent breakup. Information on the status of the relationship 
and timing of relationship termination may provide insight into precipitating events that may have 
contributed to the incident. 
 
 
10.10 Children in Victim’s Home 
 
 
10.10.1 Children under 18 living at home: IPV_ChildrenHome 
10.10.2 Number of children under 18 living at home: IPV_ChildrenNumberLiving 
10.10.3 Any children not offspring of IPV Perpetrator: IPV_StepChildPerpetrator 
10.10.4 Any children not offspring of IPV Victim: IPV_StepChildVictim 
 
Definitions: 
 IPV_ChildrenHome: Indicator of whether or not there were children under 18 living at the home. 
 IPV_ChildrenNumberLiving: How many children under age 18 were living at the victim’s home at 
the time of the incident? 
 IPV_StepChildPerpetrator: Were any of those children not the IPV Perpetrator’s offspring? 
 IPV_StepChildVictim: Were any of those children not the IPV Victim’s offspring? 
 
Response Options: 
 IPV_ChildrenHome  
 IPV_StepChildPerpetrator 
 IPV_StepChildVictim 
0  No 
1 Yes 
9  Unknown 
 
 IPV_ChildrenNumberLiving 
88  N ot applicable  
99  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
This set of variables is only for IPV Victims or IPV Perpetrators who are killed by an intimate partner. 
 
 IPV_ChildrenHome: Code “Yes” if there were children under age 18 living in the IPV Victim’s home 
at the time of the incident. 
 IPV_ChildrenNumberLiving: Code the number of children under age 18 living in the IPV Victim’s 
home at the time of the incident. If a report indicates that children were living in the home but does 
not specify their age, it is acceptable to code this variable. 
 IPV_StepChildPerpetrator: Code “Yes” if any of the children at home were not the IPV Perpetrator’s 
from a previous or subsequent relationship. 
 IPV_StepChildVictim: Code “Yes” if any of the IPV Perpetrator’s children at home were not the IPV 
Victim’s offspring. For example, if the perpetrator had one child with an ex-spouse (the IPV Victim) 
and one from a previous or subsequent relationship, code “Yes.” 
Because we are attempting to describe the problem of children who are exposed to the violent death of 
===== Page 212 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 212 | Page  
  
a parent by a partner, please answer these questions with reference to the IPV Victim’s or IPV 
Perpetrator’s children and not with reference to other children who may be living in the house (such as 
cousins or neighbors) or witnessed the incident (such as a passer-by). 
 
 
10.11 Children Present During Incident 
 
 
10.11.1 Number of children exposed to homicide: IPV_ChildrenNumberExposed 
10.11.2 Number of children 5 or under exposed to homicide: IPV_ChildrenNumberUnder5 
10.11.3 Use of child as shield during incident: IPV_ChildrenShield 
10.11.4 Child intervened during incident: IPV_ChildrenIntervened 
 
Definitions: 
 IPV_ChildrenNumberExposed: Number of children directly exposed to the incident (i.e., saw it, 
heard it, or discovered the body). 
 IPV_ChildrenNumberUnder5: Number of children age 5 or younger who witnessed the incident. 
 IPV_ChildrenShield: Use of child as shield during the incident. 
 IPV_ChildrenIntervened: Child intervened during the incident. 
 
Response Options:  
 IPV_ChildrenNumberExposed  
 IPV_ChildrenNumberUnder5 
Numeric 
9 Some, but unknown number  
99  Unknown 
 
 IPV_ChildrenShield  
 IPV_ChildrenIntervened 
0 No 
1 Yes 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
 IPV_ChildrenNumberExposed: Code the number of children (under the age of 18) who were directly 
exposed to the homicide. For example, they saw it, they heard it through the walls, they witnessed 
the suspect abducting the victim, they were attacked or threatened during the incident or were 
used as a shield, or they discovered the body. 
 IPV_ChildrenNumberUnder5: Code the number of children (age 5 and younger) who were directly 
exposed to the homicide. For example, they saw it, they heard it through the walls, they witnessed 
the suspect abducting the victim, they were attacked or threatened during the incident or were 
used as a shield, or they discovered the body. 
 IPV_ChildrenShield: Code “Yes” if a person in the incident attempted to use a child as a physical 
shield to prevent or end an attack. 
 IPV_ChildrenIntervened: code “Yes” if a child attempted to intervene during the homicide incident. 
For example, if a child tried to in some way prevent the IPV Perpetrator from harming the IPV Victim 
by stepping between them, made verbal threats, etc. 
 
===== Page 213 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 213 | Page  
  
 
10.12 Restraining Order Variables 
 
 
10.12.1 Restraining order ever: IPV_RestrainingOrderHistory 
10.12.2 Restraining order at time of incident: IPV_RestrainingOrder 
10.12.3 Restraining order type: IPV_RestrainingOrderType 
10.12.4 Restraining order issue date: IPV_RestrainingOrderIssueDate 
10.12.5 Restraining order served: IPV_RestrainingOrderServed 
10.12.6 Persons protected by restraining order: IPV_RestOrderPersonsProtect 
 
Definitions: 
 IPV_RestrainingOrderHistory: Refers to whether there was ever a restraining order between the 
members of the couple (IPV Victim and IPV Perpetrator). 
 IPV_RestrainingOrder: Refers to whether there was a restraining order between the members of 
the couple at the time of incident. 
 IPV_RestrainingOrderType: The type of restraining order in place.  
 IPV_RestrainingOrderIssueDate: The date the restraining order was issued. 
 IPV_RestrainingOrderServed: Indication of whether the restraining order was served. 
 IPV_RestOrderPersonsProtect: Individual(s) protected by the restraining order. 
 
Response Options:  
 IPV_RestrainingOrderHistory  
 IPV_RestrainingOrder 
0  No 
1 Yes 
9 Unknown 
 
 IPV_RestrainingOrderType 
1 Emergency 
2 Temporary 
3 Permanent 
8  No restraining order  
9  Unknown 
 
 IPV_RestrainingOrderIssueDate 
Date (format: MM/DD/YYYY) 
 
 IPV_RestrainingOrderServed 
0  No 
1  Yes 
8  No restraining order  
9  Unknown 
 
 IPV_RestOrderPersonsProtect 
1 IPV Victim 
2 IPV Perpetrator 
3 Both 
===== Page 214 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 214 | Page  
  
8 Other 
9 No restraining order  
88  Not applicable 
99  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Code “IPV_RestrainingOrder” as “Yes” if a restraining order involving both the IPV Perpetrator and IPV 
Victim was issued at the time of the incident. Data sources for this information will likely vary by state. 
Some states can utilize statewide restraining order databases, while other states must rely on contacting 
county courthouses where the fatal incident took place. The LE report is another possible source for this 
information. Restraining orders may be referred to in a number of ways including restraining order, 
protective order, or by specific state statute number. Restraining orders that are not abuse prevention 
orders do not qualify and should not be included. For example, a restraining order not to spend money 
from a joint account filed as part of divorce proceedings should not be included. 
 
Information may also be available on the date that the restraining order was issued and served 
documentation of the restraining order should indicate the date on which it was issued. This should be 
entered with month, day, and year. The date served may not be as readily available. This information 
may be found in LE report, Domestic Violence Fatality Review Team (DVFRT) report, or court records. 
The element only requires a “Yes,” “No,” or “Unknown” response. 
 
Documentation for the restraining order should also include information on the individual(s) protected 
by the order. While most restraining orders will include only one of the partners, some may also include 
other child dependents. The information requested for the restraining orders provides more detail on 
the timing and coverage of the restraining order and may provide insight into precipitating events of the 
incident. If multiple restraining orders exist, record only the most recent between the intimate partners. 
 
 
10.13 Prior Arrests/Convictions 
 
 
10.13.1 Prior arrest(s): IPV_PriorArrestPerpetrator, IPV_PriorArrestVictim 
10.13.2 Type of arrest(s): IPV_ PerpetratorArrestType, IPV_VictimArrestType 
10.13.3 Type of arrest(s) if other: IPV_PerpetratorArrestTypeText, IPV_VictimArrestTypeText 
10.13.4 Prior conviction(s): IPV_PriorConvictionsPerpetrator, PriorConvictionsVictim 
10.13.5 Type of conviction(s): IPV_ConvictionTypePerpetrator, IPV_ConvictionTypeVictim 
10.13.6 Type of conviction(s) if other: IPV_ConvictionTypeOtherPerp, 
IPV_ConvictionTypeOtherVictim 
 
Definitions: 
 IPV_PriorArrest: IPV Perpetrator/Victim had prior arrest(s). 
 IPV_ArrestType: Type of arrests for IPV Perpetrator/Victim. 
 IPV_ArrestTypeText: Text describing other type(s) of arrest for IPV Perpetrator/Victim. 
 IPV_PriorConviction: IPV Perpetrator/Victim had prior criminal conviction(s). 
 IPV_ConvictionType: Type of convictions for IPV Perpetrator/Victim.   
 IPV_ConvictionTypeOther: Text describing other type(s) of conviction for IPV Perpetrator/Victim. 
 
Response Options: 
===== Page 215 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 215 | Page  
  
 IPV_PriorArrest  
 IPV_PriorConviction 
0  No 
1 Yes 
9  Unknown 
 
 IPV_ArrestType  
 IPV_ConvictionType 
1 Homicide 
2 Robbery 
3 Sexual assault (forcible) 
4 Assault offenses (other than sexual assault) 
5  Property offenses 
6 Weapons offenses 
7 Drug abuse violations 
8 Offenses against family or children  
9  Alcohol-related offenses 
10  Restraining order violations 
11 Other (specify) 
12  Other unspecified 
99  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
The data elements provide information from state criminal history records. The coder should first 
indicate if an arrest or conviction occurred and then indicate the category. If a person has arrests and/or 
convictions in more than one category, list the most severe type of offense (homicide, then sexual 
assault, other assaults, offenses against family or children, robbery, property offenses, weapons 
offenses, drug abuse violations, and alcohol-related offenses). If this data element is coded from the 
criminal history records of a specific municipal or county law enforcement department, the variable 
should be coded as “Unknown” if no arrest is found, because these records do not include other law 
enforcement departments in the state. 
 
Definitions for all Part I and Part II offenses can be found in the UCR handbook (FBI, 2004): 
http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/additional-ucr-publications/ucr_handbook.pdf/view. 
 
Prior arrests or convictions for homicide offenses include murder/non-negligent manslaughter, 
negligent manslaughter, and justifiable homicide. Sex offenses include forcible rape, forcible sodomy, 
sexual assault with an object, and forcible fondling. Assault offenses include aggravated assault, simple 
assault, and intimidation. Property offenses should include the crimes of: burglary, larceny/theft, fraud, 
possession of stolen property, embezzlement, and vandalism. Weapons offenses include any crimes 
related to the manufacture, sale, or possession of deadly weapons. Drug abuse violations are defined as 
“the violation of laws prohibiting the production, distribution, and/or use of certain controlled 
substances and the equipment or devices utilized in their preparation and/or use.” Offenses against 
family or children are defined as “unlawful nonviolent acts by a family member (or legal guardian) that 
threaten the physical, mental, or economic well-being or morals of another family member and that are 
not classifiable as other offenses, such as assault or sex offenses.” Alcohol-related offenses include 
driving under the influence and drunkenness. 
 
===== Page 216 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 216 | Page  
  
 
10.13.7 Prior IPV Arrest(s): IPV_PriorArrestPerpetratorIPV, IPV_PriorArrestVictimIPV 
 
Definition: 
IPV Perpetrator/Victim had prior arrest for violence against an intimate partner. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No 
1  Yes 
9  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
This variable provides information that is most likely to be included in the LE reports. Some state 
criminal history databases explicitly identify domestic violence offense, but some do not, so this variable 
may be difficult for some states to code. Prior IPV arrests should be defined as any UCR Part I crimes—
homicide, forcible rape, robbery, and aggravated assault—or the Part II crime of simple assault when 
committed against a former or current intimate partner. 
 
 
10.14 Disability Variables± 
 
 
10.14.1 Physical illness: IPV_PhysicalIllnessPerpetrator, IPV_PhysicalIllnessVictim 
10.14.2 Diagnosis of physical illness: IPV_DiagPhysicalIllnessPerp,  
 IPV_DiagPhysicalIllnessVictim 
10.14.3 Disability: IPV_DisabilityPerpetrator, IPV_DisabilityVictim 
10.14.4 Disability was physical: IPV_DisabilityPhysicalPerp, IPV_DisabilityPhysicalVictim 
10.14.5 Disability was developmental: IPV_DisabilityDevelopmentalPerp, 
IPV_DisabilityDevelopmentalVic 
10.14.6 Disability was sensory: IPV_DisabilitySensoryPerp, IPV_DisabilitySensoryVictim 
 
Definitions: 
 IPV_PhysicalIllness: IPV Perpetrator/Victim had an acute or chronic physical illness at the 
time of the incident. 
 IPV_DiagPhysicalIillness: Free text field to indicate diagnosis if IPV Perpetrator/Victim was 
physically ill at the time of the incident. 
 IPV_Disability: IPV Perpetrator/Victim had a disability at the time of the incident. 
 IPV_DisabilityPhysical: IPV Perpetrator’s/Victim’s disability was physical (e.g., paraplegia, 
cerebral palsy). 
 IPV_DisabilityDevelopmental: IPV Perpetrator’s/Victim’s disability was developmental 
(e.g., intellectual disability). 
 IPV_DisabilitySensory: IPV Perpetrator’s/Victim’s disability was sensory (e.g., blindness, 
deafness). 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1  Yes 
===== Page 217 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 217 | Page  
  
9  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Physical illness may be acute (e.g., viral gastroenteritis, pneumonia) or chronic (e.g., diabetes, asthma, 
sickle cell anemia). However, if the chronic illness did not impose increased care demands at the time of 
the incident, do not code “Yes.” For example, if an individual had a history of asthma, but had no acute 
exacerbation at the time of the incident, code “No.” The severity of the illness should not be considered 
when coding; any mention in the record of the individual being physically ill at the time of the incident is 
sufficient to warrant coding “PhysicalIllness” as “Yes.” Physical disability implies a chronic physical 
impairment that has a substantial, long-term effect on the individual’s day-to-day functioning (e.g., 
cerebral palsy). Developmental disability implies a chronic cognitive or developmental deficit that has a 
substantial, long-term effect on the individual’s day-to-day functioning (e.g., autism, intellectual 
disability). Sensory disability implies a chronic sensory deficit that has a substantial, long-term impact on 
the individual’s day-to-day functioning (e.g., blindness, deafness). If an individual was not specifically 
diagnosed with or documented to have one of the listed disabilities, answer “No.” The information used 
to complete this data element may come from medical records and/or autopsy. 
 
±For information about CDC and WHO definitions of disability, see: 
http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/disabilityandhealth/types.html 
 
 
10.14.7 Alcohol use suspected: IPV_SuspectedIntoxicatedPerp, 
IPV_SuspectedIntoxicatedVictim 
10.14.8 Drug use suspected: IPV_SuspectedDrugUsePerpetrator, IPV_SuspectedDrugUseVictim 
 
Definitions: 
 IPV_SuspectedIntoxicated: IPV Perpetrator/Victim suspected to be under the influence of alcohol at 
the time of the incident. 
 IPV_SuspectedDrugUse: IPV Perpetrator/Victim suspected to be under the influence of an illicit drug 
at the time of the incident. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No 
1  Yes 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
SuspectedIntoxicated is asked of victims only. In the IPV module, it is also asked of both the IPV Victim 
and IPV Perpetrator. SuspectedDrugUse is a new variable also asked of both IPV Victims and 
Perpetrators. 
 
Alcohol use suspected should be coded “Yes” using information from witness or investigator reports 
(e.g., Law enforcement note that the IPV Perpetrator or Victim had been drinking), circumstantial 
evidence (e.g., empty six pack scattered around IPV Perpetrator or Victim), or test results (e.g., Law 
enforcement breathalyzer). 
 
This variable refers only to alcohol use and not drug use. Therefore, if an IPV Perpetrator or Victim was 
said to have been smoking crack on the day of the incident, but tested negative for alcohol and there is 
===== Page 218 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 218 | Page  
  
no evidence of drinking, should be coded as “No.” The phrase “in the hours preceding the incident” can 
be interpreted relatively broadly. For example, if friends report that an IPV Perpetrator or Victim was 
drinking heavily at a party, and returned home that evening and was killed sometime later that night, 
should be coded as “Yes.” The level of intoxication is not relevant in coding this variable. Without 
evidence of alcohol use, code this variable as “No.” Use the “Unknown” option only if the source does 
not have a narrative that could provide the evidence of intoxication. 
 
Drug use suspected should be coded “Yes” based on witness or investigator reports or test results from 
the IPV Perpetrator or Victim. Illicit drugs include not only street drugs like heroin, cocaine, marijuana, 
and methamphetamine, but also illicitly obtained prescription drugs like oxycodone and substances that 
are sniffed for their mood-altering effects (e.g., sniffing glue, “huffing” gasoline). Prescription drugs 
believed to be taken in accordance with the prescription directions should not be included as illicit drug 
use. 
 
Both SuspectedIntoxicated and SuspectedDrugUse will include some false positives, since they are not 
necessarily based on test results. For a more conservative evaluation of drug and alcohol use in 
suspects, use toxicological testing if available. 
 
Note: As of August 2013, a perpetrator/victim who takes methadone is no longer assumed to be in 
treatment for heroin addiction and should be coded as “No” unless other information is available (e.g., 
taking methadone as part of substance abuse treatment). Please note that the victim is taking 
methadone on the toxicology page (for perpetrator taking methadone, please note this in the narrative). 
 
 
10.14.9 Mental health problem: IPV_MentalHealthProblemPerp, 
IPV_MentalHealthProblemVictim 
 
Definitions: 
IPV Perpetrator/Victim had a mental health problem. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1  Yes 
9  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
If the case involves a suicide, this information will be captured in the general NVDRS system for the 
suicide victim. Code a person as “Yes” for if he or she has been identified as having a mental health 
problem. Mental health problems include disorders and syndromes listed in the DSM-5 (Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Revision) with the exception of alcohol and other substance 
disorders (as these are captured in separate variables). Examples of disorders qualifying as mental 
health problems include not only diagnoses such as major depression, schizophrenia, and generalized 
anxiety disorder, but developmental disorders (e.g., intellectual disability, autism, attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder), eating disorders, personality disorders, and organic mental disorders such as 
Alzheimer’s and other dementias. Also code “Yes” if the person was being treated for a mental health 
problem including treatment through involuntary mechanisms such as an Emergency Order of 
Detention, even if the nature of the problem is unclear (e.g., “was being treated for various psychiatric 
problems”). It is acceptable to endorse this variable on the basis of past treatment of a mental health 
===== Page 219 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 219 | Page  
  
problem, unless it is specifically noted that the problem has been resolved. For example, “IPV Victim or 
Perpetrator was hospitalized twice for mental problems,” is adequate basis for coding as “Yes.” Code 
“Yes” if a mental health problem is noted even if the timeframe is unclear (as in “history of depression”), 
or if the person was seeking mental health treatment or someone was seeking treatment on his or her 
behalf (e.g., “family was attempting to have him hospitalized for psychiatric problems”). This should also 
be coded as “Yes” if the IPV Victim or Perpetrator has a prescription for an antidepressant or other 
psychiatric medication. The drug list provided in the training notebook identifies drugs that can be 
considered psychiatric medications. We have separate questions for substance use problems. 
Therefore, do not include substance abuse as a “current mental health problem.” 
 
Coding “No” (as opposed to “Unknown”) means that the record explicitly stated that the person had no 
known mental health problems. Code “Unknown” without information about the person’s mental health 
status or if the information is unclear. 
 
Examples 
 Yes 
o Toxicology report from medical examiner indicates that the IPV Victim or Perpetrator tested 
positive for Sertraline (an antidepressant) 
o Person had posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)  
o History of depression 
o Was under the care of a psychiatrist 
 No 
o Record states “no known mental disorders” 
 Unknown 
o Neighbor indicates that the person was not acting normally. Was depressed over a recent 
break-up. 
 
 
10.15 Mental Health Diagnoses 
 
 
10.15.1 Mental health diagnosis 1: IPV_MentalHealthDiagPerp1, 
IPV_MentalHealthDiagVictim1 
10.15.2 Mental health diagnosis 2: IPV_MentalHealthDiagPerp2, 
IPV_MentalHealthDiagVictim2 
10.15.3 Mental health diagnosis 3: IPV_MentalHealthDiagPerp3, 
IPV_MentalHealthDiagVictim3 
10.15.4 Other mental health diagnosis: IPV_MentalHealthDiagOtherPerp, 
IPV_MentalHealthDiagOtherVictim 
 
Definitions: 
 IPV_MentalHealthDiagnosis1: IPV Perpetrator/Victim mental health diagnosis 
 IPV_MentalHealthDiagnosis2: IPV Perpetrator/Victim mental health diagnosis 2 
 IPV_MentalHealthDiagnosis3: IPV Perpetrator/Victim mental health diagnosis 3 
 IPV_MentalHealthDiagnosisOther: IPV Perpetrator/Victim other mental health diagnosis 
 
Response Options: 
 IPV_Mentalhealthdiagnosis1/2/3 
===== Page 220 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 220 | Page  
  
1 Depression/dysthymia 
2 Bipolar disorder 
3 Schizophrenia 
4 Anxiety disorder 
5 Posttraumatic stress disorder  
6  ADD or hyperactivity disorder  
7  Eating disorder 
8 Obsessive- compulsive disorder 
9 Mental retardation 
10 Autism 
11 Personality disorders (e.g., borderline, schizoid, histrionic, avoidant, etc.)  
12  Alzheimer’s 
88  Not applicable 
99  Unknown 
 
 IPV_MentalHealthDiagnosisOther 
Text 
 
Discussion:  
Code up to three diagnoses. If a diagnosis is not on the code list, code other mental health diagnosis” by 
recording the diagnosis in the text field. If the record indicates more than three diagnoses, note the 
additional diagnoses.  For cases in which the person was noted as being treated for a mental health 
problem, but the actual diagnosis is not documented, code” as “Unknown.” If the person had a mental 
health problem but the nature of the problem has not been diagnosed (e.g., “was hearing voices and 
having paranoid delusions; family was attempting to have her committed”), code as “Not applicable” 
since she/he had not been treated or diagnosed. Do not attempt to apply a diagnosis based on reading 
the symptoms. While it is acceptable to code “mental health problem” based on the IPV Victim’s or 
Perpetrator’s prescription for a psychiatric medication, do not infer a specific diagnosis based on the 
medication. 
 
 
10.15.5 Currently in treatment for mental health problem: IPV_TreatmentMentalHealthPerp, 
IPV_TreatmentMentalHealthVictim 
10.15.6 Ever treated for mental health problem: IPV_HistoryMentalIllnessPerp, 
IPV_HistoryMentalIllnessVictim 
 
Definitions: 
 IPV_TreatmentMentalHealth: IPV Perpetrator/Victim currently in treatment for a mental health 
problem. 
 IPV_HistoryMentalIllness: IPV Perpetrator/Victim ever treated for a mental health problem. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No 
1  Yes 
9  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
This should be coded “Yes” if the IPV Victim or Perpetrator was in current treatment (that is, had a 
===== Page 221 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 221 | Page  
  
current prescription for a psychiatric medication or saw a mental health professional within the past 2 
months). Treatment includes seeing a psychiatrist, psychologist, medical doctor, therapist, or other 
counselor for a mental health or substance abuse problem; receiving a prescription for an 
antidepressant or other psychiatric medicine (see training notebook for list of psychiatric drugs); or 
residing in an inpatient or halfway house facility for mental health problems. This variable indicates 
whether the IPV Perpetrator or Victim was noted as ever having received professional treatment for a 
mental health problem, either at the time of death or in the past. If an IPV Perpetrator or Victim is in 
current treatment, by definition this variable (ever in treatment) should be endorsed. If a decedent died 
as the result of an overdose from multiple medications and it is not clear whether the medications were 
his or her own (as in an IPV Victim or Perpetrator swallowing everything in the family’s medicine 
cabinet), the existence of an antidepressant or other psychiatric medication in the IPV Victim’s or 
Perpetrator’s bloodstream is not sufficient evidence of mental health treatment. For IPV Perpetrators 
and Victims who die by other means than drug overdose (e.g., shooting, hanging), toxicology test results 
indicating the presence of a psychiatric medication is sufficient evidence of mental health treatment. 
 
Examples 
Current treatment for mental illness 
 Yes 
o A recently filled, unopened prescription belonging to the IPV Victim or Perpetrator for 
an antidepressant is found in the medicine cabinet. 
o In treatment for depression for the last 10 years. 
o Released from inpatient care for bipolar disorder a week ago. 
 
 No 
o Records indicate not in mental health treatment 
o Taking St. John’s Wort (nonprescription herb) for depression because of a magazine 
article s/he had read. 
o Taking over-the-counter sleeping pills for insomnia (but note that a diagnosed sleep 
disorder would qualify). 
 
Ever treated for mental illness 
 Yes 
o Several years ago the IPV Victim or Perpetrator was treated for bipolar disorder. 
o The IPV Victim or Perpetrator had begun seeing a psychiatrist recently, but had 
previously never been in treatment. 
 
 
10.15.7 Alcohol problem: IPV_AlcoholProblemPerpetrator, IPV_AlcoholProblemVictim 
10.15.8 Other substance abuse problem: IPV_SusbstanceAbusePerpetrator, 
IPV_SusbstanceAbuseVictim 
 
Definitions: 
 IPV_AlcoholProblem: IPV Perpetrator/Victim had alcohol dependence or alcohol problem. 
 IPV_SusbstanceAbuse: IPV Perpetrator/Victim had other illicit or prescription drug abuse problem. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No 
1  Yes 
===== Page 222 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 222 | Page  
  
9  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Code “Yes” for if the IPV Perpetrator or Victim was perceived by self or others to have a problem with, 
or to be addicted to, alcohol or other drugs. An IPV Perpetrator or Victim who is noted as participating in 
a drug or alcohol rehabilitation program or treatment—including self-help groups and 12-step programs 
—should be coded as “Yes” even if the IPV Perpetrator or Victim was noted as being currently clean and 
sober. A problem from the past that has resolved and no longer appears to apply should not be coded. 
Can be endorsed if an IPV Perpetrator or Victim was noted as using illicit drugs (such as heroin or 
cocaine), abusing prescription medications (such as pain relievers or Valium), or regularly using inhalants 
(e.g., sniffing gas). If the IPV Perpetrator or Victim is mentioned as using illicit drugs—even if addiction 
or abuse is not specifically mentioned—code as “Yes.” The phrase “history of drug abuse” is sufficient to 
justify endorsing unless it is noted that the IPV Perpetrator or Victim is no longer a drug user. Previously 
attempting suicide via overdose is not sufficient justification for endorsing in the absence of other 
information. 
 
Examples:  
Alcohol problem  
 Yes 
o C/ME report indicates the IPV Victim or Perpetrator was in an alcohol rehabilitation 
program last year. Called AA sponsor the day before the incident. 
o Noted in C/ME report that the IPV Perpetrator or Victim had been drinking a lot lately 
and family was concerned. 
 No 
o C/ME report indicates that 20 years ago the IPV Perpetrator or Victim had trouble with 
drugs and alcohol as a teenager, but not since then. 
 
Other substance abuse problem 
 Yes 
o C/ME report indicates that the perpetrator or victim abuses his/her own painkiller 
prescription. IPV Perpetrator or Victim made regular visits to a methadone clinic. 
o IPV Perpetrator or Victim had track marks and drug paraphernalia at his/her apartment. 
o IPV Victim or Perpetrator shot him/herself after a fight with spouse over drug use and 
mounting debts. 
 No 
o IPV Perpetrator or Victim smoked marijuana occasionally. 
o IPV Perpetrator or Victim attempted suicide via medication overdose on two previous 
occasions. No evidence of substance use or abuse. 
 
 
10.15.9 Disclosed intent to die by suicide: IPV_SuicideDisclosedIntentPerp, 
IPV_SuicideDisclosedIntentVictim 
 
Definition:  
IPV Perpetrator/Victim disclosed to another person intentions to die by suicide. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No 
===== Page 223 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 223 | Page  
  
1  Yes 
9  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Code as “Yes” if the IPV Perpetrator or Victim had previously expressed suicidal feelings to another 
person, whether explicitly (e.g., “I’m considering killing myself”) or indirectly (e.g., “I think everyone 
would be better off without me” or “I know how to put a permanent end to this pain”). Do not code this 
variable as “Yes” if the IPV Perpetrator or Victim disclosed his/her intention to kill him/herself only at 
the moment of the suicide (i.e., when there was no opportunity to intervene to stop the suicide). Also, 
do not endorse this variable if the IPV Perpetrator or Victim had talked about suicide sometime in the 
distant past,  but had not disclosed his/her current intent to die by suicide to anyone. When law 
enforcement or the coroner/medical examiner document whether the IPV Perpetrator or Victim stated 
his/her intent to die by suicide, they are doing so less for the purpose of documenting a missed 
opportunity for intervention and more for the purpose of indicating why the death is being treated as a 
suicide and not a potential homicide. Therefore, the records may be unclear about timing. For example, 
the record may state, “IPV Perpetrator or Victim has spoken of suicide in the past,” and it is not entirely 
clear whether the talk about suicide was only in the past or was related to the current incident. This will 
frequently be a gray area for coding. If the record indicates disclosure of intent in the past but 
affirmatively states that there was no disclosure for the current incident, code as “No.” If the record 
indicates disclosure of intent, but is unclear about the time frame, code as “Yes.” This will sometimes be 
incorrect; however, the specificity to allow precise coding is too often missing in the records to justify 
using a narrower interpretation. 
 
Examples:  
 Yes 
o The IPV Perpetrator or Victim told a spouse that s/he was planning to end his/her suffering 
and was going to stop being a burden. 
o The IPV Perpetrator or Victim has mentioned on and off to friends that s/he was considering 
suicide; no one thought s/he would do it. 
 
 No 
o The IPV Perpetrator or Victim has spoken of suicide in the past, but not in the past few 
months when things seemed to be going better for him/her. 
 
 Unknown 
o Had previously threatened to kill his family. No further information available on mental 
health history. 
 
 
10.15.10 History of suicide attempts: IPV_HistorySuicideAttemptsPerp, 
10.15.11 IPV_HistorySuicideAttemptsVictim 
 
Definitions: 
 IPV_HistorySuicideAttemptsPerpetrator: Perpetrator had a history of attempting to die by suicide. 
 IPV_HistorySuicideAttemptsVictim: Victim had a history of attempting to die by suicide. 
 
Response Options: 
0  No 
===== Page 224 =====
 
Section 10. Intimate Partner Violence Optional Module 224 | Page  
  
1  Yes 
9  Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Code HistorySuicideAttempts as “Yes” if the IPV Perpetrator or Victim was known to have made 
previous suicide attempts, regardless of the severity of those attempts. 
===== Page 225 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  225 | Page  
  
SECTION 11: SCHOOL-ASSOCIATED VIOLENT DEATH (SAVD) MODULE  
 
 
11.1 SAVD Inclusion Criteria 
 
11.1.1 This is a School-Associated Violent Death/SAVD Case: SAVD_Case  
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates whether the death is considered an SAVD based on the location and context of 
the death. Any death that happens on a public or private K-12 school property, at a K-12 school-
sponsored event, or on K-12 school-sponsored transportation is considered an SAVD.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox 
 
Discussion: 
This checkbox appears on the “Injury and Death” tab beneath the “type of location where injured” 
variable. For the purposes of NVDRS, SAVD includes any homicide, suicide, legal intervention death, 
unintentional firearm death, or death of undetermined intent that occurs: 1) on the campus of a 
functioning primary or secondary school (K-12) in the U.S.; 2) at a school-sponsored event associated 
with a primary or secondary school; or 3) on K-12 school-sponsored transportation. An SAVD death can 
involve any person (e.g., student, staff, faculty member, community member, person unknown to the 
campus) regardless of affiliation to the school. SAVD incidents only capture events related to K-12 
campuses and school events.  
 
Please note the following should not be classified as SAVD: 
 Deaths on college campuses are not considered SAVDs unless there is information indicating 
that a K-12 school operated on a college campus (e.g., laboratory or demonstration schools), 
and the death took place on the property of the K-12 school.  
 Deaths taking place at dedicated preschools are not SAVDs unless the preschool is embedded 
within a K-12 campus (e.g., schools that begin at age three (K3) and age four (K4). Deaths that 
occur on the way to or from school are not considered SAVDs unless the death happened on 
school transportation (e.g., school bus).  
 Deaths on the way to or from school using public transportation (e.g., city bus, subway, train) 
should not be captured as SAVDs.  
 
Please note the following for determining if an incident happened at a school-sponsored event: 
 A school-sponsored event can occur on or off-campus and includes events that are outside of 
the typically scheduled school routine (e.g., field trips, sporting events, competitions, dances, 
ceremonies). On-campus before and after school activities such as academic enrichment, club 
meetings, and sports/dance/music practices are not considered school-sponsored events but 
part of a typical school schedule and are included. 
 School-sponsored events are usually organized and hosted by the school and often include 
school-organized chaperones and/or presence of school administration, teachers, or other 
school personnel.  
 An event where many students are in attendance but that is not sanctioned or hosted by the 
===== Page 226 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  226 | Page  
  
school is not a school-sponsored event. For example, a gathering of students at a local 
restaurant after a sporting event is not a school-sponsored event unless it was organized and 
hosted by school personnel.  
 
Note: The SAVD Module and corresponding variables were added in November 2020. Data collection for 
the SAVD Module applies to eligible deaths occurring on and after January 1, 2021. 
 
 
11.2 SAVD Incident Variables 
11.2.1 Number of non-fatally injured persons: SAVD_NumberNonfatalIyinjured  
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates the total number of people who were non-fatally injured in the event.  
 
Response Options:  
Number of nonfatally injured victims or one of the following: 
0            None 
9999     Nonfatally injured victims, number unknown or unspecified  
 
Discussion: 
 Record the total number of people who sustained a non-fatal injury during the course of the 
incident and survived.  Although the NVDRS Variable “number non-fatally shot – 1.9” captures 
non-fatal firearm injuries, this variable captures non-fatal injuries including but not limited to 
firearms. For example, non-fatal injuries might include being trampled or injured in a large 
crowd, injuring a limb while trying to escape, or being injured by explosives.  
 This variable is intended to capture serious injuries. A description of the injury in the source 
documents typically is enough to consider the injury serious, unless the injury is explicitly 
described as minor or mild. If mild or minor injuries are enumerated, subtract those from the 
total number of non-fatal injuries mentioned.  
 Enter “0” if there is no indication of non-fatal injuries.   
 Enter “9999” if source documents indicate that the incident had nonfatally injured victims, but 
the number is unknown or unspecified.  
 
 
11.2.2 SAVD Location Type: SAVD_Location 
  
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the incident occurred on campus or off campus.   
 
Response Options: 
1    On campus 
2    Off campus 
99  Unknown, unspecified 
 
Discussion: 
Any death occurring on K-12 campus property is considered an SAVD. Campus property includes but is 
not limited to classrooms, hallways, administrative offices, libraries, cafeterias, performance halls, 
===== Page 227 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  227 | Page  
  
indoor and outdoor athletic facilities, parking lots and playgrounds. Off-campus events are only 
considered SAVDs if the event was school-sponsored (e.g., field trips, dances, ceremonies, sporting 
events). Off-campus events can occur in any location and should be captured here by endorsing “2 – Off 
campus.” For all SAVD incidents, the NVDRS variable “Type of location where injury occurred – 4.3.3” 
should be endorsed and the location should be described in the incident narrative. 
 
 
SAVD Campus Location  
 
 11.2.3 SAVD_CampusLocation_Classroom 
11.2.4 SAVD_CampusLocation_Hallway 
11.2.5  SAVD_CampusLocation_Cafeteria 
11.2.6  SAVD_CampusLocation_GymnasiumIndoorFacility 
11.2.7  SAVD_CampusLocation_LockerRoom 
11.2.8  SAVD_CampusLocation_Office 
11.2.9  SAVD_CampusLocation_Stairwell 
11.2.10  SAVD_CampusLocation_Restroom 
11.2.11  SAVD_CampusLocation_BreakroomorLounge 
11.2.12  SAVD_CampusLocation_Auditorium 
11.2.13  SAVD_CampusLocation_LawnorGarden 
11.2.14  SAVD_CampusLocation_Field_Playground 
11.2.15  SAVD_CampusLocation_ParkingLot 
11.2.16  SAVD_CampusLocation_Driveway 
11.2.17  SAVD_CampusLocation_BusPickUporDropoff 
11.2.18  SAVD_CampusLocation_LibraryorMediaCenter 
11.2.19  SAVD_CampusLocation_OtherOutdoorLocation (Fill in Text) 
11.2.20  SAVD_CampusLocation_OtherIndoorLocation (Fill in Text) 
 
Definition:  
These variables indicate where on campus the fatal incident occurred.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check all that apply) 
 
Discussion: 
Multiple response options can be selected for the location of the incident. For example, if a death 
occurred in a restroom in a sports facility, both restroom (11.2.10) and gymnasium or indoor sports 
facility (11.2.6) should be selected. Additionally, if there are multiple school-associated deaths in an 
incident, each location of injury (fatal and non-fatal) should be selected. If further, more specific 
information is known about the injury location(s), it should be noted in the narrative corresponding to 
the data source where the information is found.  
 
 
11.2.21 Type of School-Sponsored Event: SAVD_EventType 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates the type of school-sponsored event that was taking place at the time of the 
injury.  
===== Page 228 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  228 | Page  
  
 
Response Options: 
1  Sporting event  
2  Dance 
3      Field Trip  
4      Ceremony 
5      Performance or competition  
6      Other  
8      Not applicable 
9      Unknown  
 
Discussion: 
School-sponsored events include but are not limited to sporting events, dances, ceremonies, 
performances, competitions, and field trips. School sponsored events that are not specified on this list of 
variables should be coded as “Other” with details about the type of event noted in the narratives as 
available. A school-sponsored event that is unspecified in the source documents (e.g., “victim was on a 
school outing) should also be endorsed as “Other.” If source documents provide details about the 
school-sponsored event, please include these details in the incident narrative.  
 
 
11.2.22a Security measures at the time of injury-present: SAVD_SecurityPresent  
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if security measures were known to be present at the time of the injury.  
 
Response Options: 
0  No 
1  Yes 
9  Unknown 
 
Free text field if other information is available 
  
Discussion: 
Presence of security measures (e.g.,security cameras, metal detectors) should be endorsed if the source 
documents mention that security devices were on the premises (whether on or off campus) at the time 
of the injury. Security measures do not have be noted by source documents as being in use in order to 
be listed as present. Furthermore, information about whether or not the security devices were in good 
working order does not have to be known. The opportunity to note if particular security devices were in-
use is in a separate checkbox (see variable 11.2.22b).  
 
 
11.2.22b Security measures at the time of injury-in use: SAVD_SecurityInUse  
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if security measures that were known to be present were in use at the time of the 
injury.  
 
Response Option: 
===== Page 229 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  229 | Page  
  
Checkbox (Check all that apply) 
 
Discussion: 
This variable should only be endorsed if the presence of a security measure is endorsed and if data 
sources indicate that security measures were actively in-use. Details about the use of security measures 
can be entered into the “Other text” field (see variable 11.2.36). 
 
 
Types of Security Measures Specified as Present and/or In Use   
 
11.2.23 SAVD_WalkThroughMetalDetectors_Present 
11.2.24 SAVD_WalkThroughMetalDetectors_InUse 
11.2.25 SAVD_HandHeldMetalDetectors_Present 
11.2.26 SAVD_HandHeldMetalDetectors_InUse 
11.2.27 SAVD_SurveillanceCameras_Present 
11.2.28 SAVD_SurveillanceCameras_InUse 
11.2.29 SAVD_CommunicationDevices_Present 
11.2.30 SAVD_CommunicationDevices_InUse 
11.2.31 SAVD_AccessRestrictions_Present 
11.2.32 SAVD_AccessRestrictions_InUse 
11.2.33 SAVD_OtherSecurity_Present 
11.2.34 SAVD_OtherSecurity_InUse 
11.2.35 SAVD_OtherSecurity_Specify  
 
Definition:  
These variables indicate which security measures were noted as being present and which security 
measures were noted as being in-use at the time of incident.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check all that apply) 
 
Discussion: 
If a security measure is endorsed as “In-use,” it should also be endorsed as “Present.” A security 
measure should be endorsed as in-use if source documents state that the device was in-use (e.g., 
“surveillance video captured the event”) or imply that the device was in-use (e.g., “the victim was 
identified entering the building on surveillance video”). If use of security measures is unknown, 
checkboxes should be left blank. If “Other” is selected as present or in-use, details can be entered into 
the “other text” field (11.2.36). 
 
 
11.2.36 Security Measures Text: SAVD_Security_Text 
 
Definition:  
This is a free text field to provide more information about the use of security measures.  
 
Response Option: 
Text 
 
===== Page 230 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  230 | Page  
  
Discussion: 
Information such as number of security devices, when in use, where in use, how they monitored are 
examples of information that would be useful here. Details about why security measures were not 
present or in-use can also be included here, as available.  
 
 
Which of the following did any of the victims or suspects leave as signs that they were 
considering this action? 
 
11.2.37 SAVD_Notes(s) 
11.2.38 SAVD_Notes(s)_Text 
11.2.39 SAVD_Journal entry 
11.2.40 SAVD_Journal entry_Text 
11.2.41 SAVD_Social media (e.g., blogs, Twitter, wall postings on social networking sites) 
11.2.42 SAVD_Social media_Text 
11.2.43 SAVD_Verbal threats 
11.2.44 SAVD_Verbal threats_Text 
11.2.45 SAVD_Electronic media (e.g., email messages, IM, or texts via cellphone, voice mail, 
video, etc.) 
11.2.46 SAVD_Electronic media_Text 
11.2.47 SAVD_Other actions (e.g., playful suggestion that person might commit act, voiced 
suicidal thoughts)   
11.2.48 SAVD_Other actions_Text 
 
Definition:  
These variables indicate if the victims or suspects left any signs or communication prior to the incident 
that they were considering the injurious action.  
 
Response Options: 
Checkbox (Check all that apply) 
Text 
 
Discussion: 
After homicide and suicide events, people look for things, such as comments, notes, threats, or actions 
that took place prior to the incident that could have signaled a potential risk for this type of behavior. 
These variables capture any signs left by victims and suspects indicating they were considering this 
action. Please include as many signs as are indicated in the source documents, even if they were not 
recognized as a sign at the time they happened. Use text fields corresponding to the sign/indicator to 
provide more details.  
 
 
11.2.49a Did anyone know about the possibility of this event before it happened? 
SAVD_AdvanceKnowledge  
11.2.49b If yes, please specify: SAVD_AdvanceKnowledge_Text 
 
Definition:  
This variable captures if anyone knew about the possibility of this event before it happened.  
 
===== Page 231 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  231 | Page  
  
Response Options: 
0  No 
1  Yes 
9  Unknown  
 
Text 
 
Discussion: 
This variable indicates if anyone (e.g., witnesses, bystanders, victims [fatally injured and non-fatally 
injured], or others) had advance knowledge that the incident might occur. This variable should be 
completed to indicate whether or not the victim or suspect discussed the possibility of this event 
occurring or if the victim or suspect hinted or implied that the event might occur. Details can be 
provided in the open text field. There are also variables regarding what was known, who knew 
information was known, and to whom the information was disclosed (see variables 11.2.50, 11.2.51, and 
11.2.52 through 11.2.61). 
 
 
11.2.50 What information was known by witnesses (including bystanders, informants, or 
victims) in advance of the incident? SAVD_KnowledgeContent 
 
Definition:  
This variable captures details about what others may have known about the incident before it took 
place.  
 
Response Option:  
Text 
 
Discussion: 
This is a free text field to describe what information was known about the event before it took place. 
Examples include but are not limited to how long the information was known and how the victim or 
suspect communicated the information, the number of people who were targeted, the motive for the 
event, and the weapons that were going to be used. Information known by each witness should be 
placed in a separate witness entry. The term “witness” includes anyone with advance knowledge that 
the incident might occur. People with advance knowledge could include those who were also involved in 
the incident as victims or bystanders; however, those who only witnessed the event at the time it 
occurred but did not have prior knowledge should not be included.   
 
Examples of a witness may include:  
 A student who heard the suspect talking about event the week prior 
 A suspect’s friend, intimate partner, or family member with whom the suspect shared plans or 
implied that the event might occur 
 Someone who saw the suspect’s posts on social media that stated or implied that the event 
might occur 
 
The following is an example of what should not be included: 
 A student who had no prior knowledge of the event and only saw it as it was happening  
  
 
===== Page 232 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  232 | Page  
  
11.2.51 What relationship did the witness have to the suspect (in the case of a homicide 
incident) or victim (in the case of a suicide incident)? SAVD_WitnessRelationship  
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates the relationship between the person with prior knowledge of the event (i.e., 
witness) and person who carried out the fatal injury (e.g., the suspect in a homicide incident, or victim in 
a suicide incident). 
 
Response Options: 
1 Family member    
2 Previous or current intimate partner 
3 Friend/colleague  
4 School faculty/staff 
5 Fellow student at school 
6 Community/neighborhood acquaintance 
7 Stranger  
8 Other 
99 Not applicable, Unknown             
 
Free text field to specify if more information is available  
 
Discussion: 
Only one relationship type can be selected in the dropdown menu for those who had prior knowledge of 
the event. Select the relationship type that is primary and most intimate in nature. For example, a friend 
who was also a fellow student at the school should be endorsed as “Friend.” If a general statement is 
made of people knowing about the event ahead of time but no relationship is provided, select 
“Unknown, Not applicable” for the relationship type.  
 
Use the following sentence as a guide when selecting the appropriate description of the relationship: 
“The witness is the ____________ of the suspect.” For example, if the suspect in a homicide told a 
sibling that he or she was planning to carry out violence, this sentence would read “The witness is the 
family member of the suspect.”  In the case of a suicide incident, the following sentence can be used as 
a guide: “The witness is the ____________ of the victim.” For example, if a teacher of a suicide victim 
saw social media messages hinting at the victim’s plans to die by suicide, the sentence would read “The 
witness is the school faculty/staff [member] of the victim.”   
 
The open text field can be used to provide specific descriptions, overlapping relationships, and nuances 
regarding the relationship between the person with prior knowledge of the event and the suspect or 
victim as applicable. If there are multiple suspects, indicating multiple relationships with the victim, 
please use the text box to provide additional information about those multiple relationships.  
 
 
 With whom did the witness share the information he or she learned about the planned 
violence? 
 
11.2.52 SAVD_WitnessDisclosedTo_NoOne 
11.2.53 SAVD_WitnessDisclosedTo_Parent 
11.2.54 SAVD_WitnessDisclosedTo_OtherFamilyMember 
===== Page 233 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  233 | Page  
  
11.2.55 SAVD_WitnessDisclosedTo_Peers 
11.2.56 SAVD_WitnessDisclosedTo_SchoolStaff 
11.2.57 SAVD_WitnessDisclosedTo_Other 
11.2.58 SAVD_WitnessDisclosedTo_MedicalMentalHealthProfessional 
11.2.59 SAVD_WitnessDisclosedTo_NotApplicable 
11.2.60 SAVD_WitnessDisclosedTo_Unknown 
11.2.61 SAVD_WitnessDisclosedTo_Text 
 
Definition:  
These variables indicate to whom the witness disclosed prior knowledge of the incident.  
 
Response Options:  
Checkbox (Check all that apply) 
Text 
 
Discussion: 
Multiple disclosure relationships can be selected. The open text field can be used to specify any 
relationship described as “Other” and to describe what was disclosed. 
 
 
11.3 SAVD Victim Variables 
 
11.3.1 Which of the following best describes the timing of the fatal injury? 
SAVDVictim_FatalInjuryTiming 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates the timing of the incident relative to the typical school day.  
 
Response Options: 
1 On a day when no classes or school events were held (e.g., a weekend, holiday, or an official 
school break) 
2 On a school day before classes began 
3 On a school day during lunch 
4 On a school day during class changes 
5 On a school day while classes were being held 
6 On a school day during recess or other break 
7 On a school day during a school assembly 
8 On a school day immediately after school, including during detention 
9 On a school day during after-school practice or immediately after 
10 On a school day, timing unspecified 
11 Other (Fill in text field)  
99 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
This variable is used to endorse any information that is known about the timing of the incident relative 
to the typical school day schedule. If the event happened during a school-sponsored event during the 
school day (e.g., field trip) or after hours (e.g., a school dance or sporting event), endorse this variable as 
===== Page 234 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  234 | Page  
  
“11 – Other” and provide details in the “Other” text field.  
 
 
11.3.2 What was this victim’s primary affiliation with the school associated with this death? 
SAVDVictim_SchoolAffiliation  
 
Definition:  
This variable describes this victim’s primary affiliation with the school associated with this death.  
 
Response Options: 
1 A student at this school 
2 Former student at this school   
3 A teacher, administrator, or other faculty/staff at this school 
4 Security guard or police officer 
5 Family member of a student or staff member at this school 
6 Resident of surrounding community 
7 Not associated with the school or community 
66    Other  (Fill in text field) 
99 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
Only one affiliation can be selected. Select this victim’s affiliation with the school that describes the 
closest and most primary relationship between the victim and the school. For example, if a victim is a 
resident of the surrounding community and a former student of the school, select “Former student at 
this school.”  
 
 
11.3.3-11.3.11 Victim Behavior/In the 12 months prior to this event did the victim engage in any of the 
following behaviors?  
 
Definition: 
These variables indicates behavior in which the victim engaged in the 12 months prior to the incident. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.3.3 Name calling, teasing and/or bullying peers: SAVDVictimBehavior_Bullying 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim engaged in name calling, teasing and/or bullying peers or school 
personnel (in person or online) in the 12 months prior to the incident. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
===== Page 235 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  235 | Page  
  
11.3.4 Sent verbal, written, or electronic threats: SAVDVictimBehavior_Sent threats 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim sent verbal, written, or electronic threats in the 12 months prior to 
the incident. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.3.5 Posted threats or manifestos online via social media or other platforms  
SAVDVictimBehavior_Posted Threats 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim posted threats or manifestos online via social media or other 
platforms in the 12 months prior to the incident. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.3.6 Aligned themselves with violent ideologies online 
SAVDVictimBehavior_AlignedwithViolentIdeologiesOnline 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim participated in activity aligning themselves with violent ideologies 
online in the 12 months prior to the incident.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)   
 
 
11.3.7 Physically threatened or physically fought with peers 
SAVDVictimBehavior_PhysicallyThreatenedOthers 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim physically threatened or physically fought with peers 
in the 12 months prior to the incident.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.3.8 Damaged or stole another's personal property or damaged school property 
SAVDVictimBehavior_DamagedStoleProperty 
 
Definition:  
===== Page 236 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  236 | Page  
  
This variable indicates if the victim damaged or stole another's personal property or damaged school 
property in the 12 months prior to the incident.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.3.9 Possessed or used illicit substances 
SAVDVictimBehavior_PossessedUsedIllicitSubstances 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim possessed or used illicit substances in the 12 months prior to the 
incident.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.3.10 Possessed a weapon: SAVDVictimBehavior_PossessedWeapon 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim possessed a weapon in the 12 months prior to the incident.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.3.11 Other Behavior: SAVDVictimBehavior_OtherBehavior 
 
Definition:  
This free text field can be used to describe details or other notable information about the victim’s 
behavior in the 12 months prior to the incident.  
 
Response Option: 
Text 
 
Discussion: 
This variable captures behavior that the victim engaged in within the year prior to the incident. This 
information can provide context for what was happening in the victim’s life that might have contributed 
to risk for the injury; however, the behavior does not necessarily need to be related to the incident for it 
to be endorsed. 
 
 
11.3.12-11.3.15 Prior Victimization of Victim/ In the 12 months prior to this event was this individual 
victimized in any of the following ways? 
 
Definition:  
===== Page 237 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  237 | Page  
  
These variables capture victimization that the victim might have experienced in the 12 months prior to 
the incident.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.3.12 SAVDVictimPriorVictimization_CalledNamesTeasedBullied 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim experienced name calling, teasing and/or bullying by peers or school 
personnel (in person or online) in the 12 months prior to the incident. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
Discussion:  
Peers referenced in this variable did not have to attend the same school where the incident took place.  
 
 
11.3.13 SAVDVictimPriorVictimization_PropertyDamagedStolen 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim had their personal property damaged or stolen in the 12 months 
prior to the incident.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.3.14 SAVDVictimPriorVictimization_ReceivedThreats 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim received verbal, written, or electronic threats in the 12 months prior 
to the incident. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.3.15 SAVDVictimPriorVictimization_PhysicallyThreatenedAssaulted 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim was physically assaulted or threatened by peers in the 12 months 
prior to the incident. 
 
Response Option: 
===== Page 238 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  238 | Page  
  
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.3.16-11.3.20 SAVD Victim Abuse Experiences/Was this individual victimized in any of the following 
ways? 
 
Definition:  
These variables indicate if the victim experienced ongoing or past experiences of abuse, neglect, or 
other forms of victimization.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable) 
 
Discussion: 
Abuse or neglect experienced by the victim does not have to be related to the incident in order to be 
endorsed. This variable expands the NVDRS variable “History of abuse or neglect as a child – 5.4.13” by 
allowing the type of abuse/neglect to be specified and allowing forms of victimization that can occur but 
are not necessarily related to the incident (i.e., intimate partner violence, sexual violence).  
 
 Endorse abuse and neglect variables if the victim experienced child abuse/neglect at any point in the 
past, even if the victim is currently an adult. 
 Endorse if evidence of ongoing abuse is suspected, but not confirmed. Endorse if autopsy evidence 
from official records (i.e., C/ME report, hospital examination report) describes anatomical evidence 
of old or healing injuries as an indication of previous abuse. 
 Abuse can be physical, psychological, sexual or others if the source document refers to “abuse.” If 
the abuse is unspecified and happened in childhood endorse “History of abuse and neglect as a child 
– 5.4.13.” If “abuse” is mentioned in source documents but the type of abuse and timing (i.e., 
childhood versus adulthood) is not specified, do not endorse these variables. Instead, indicate in the 
narrative that abuse was mentioned in the source documents.  
 Neglect may be physical, emotional, medical, or educational. 
 Indicate the nature of the abuse or neglect in the incident narrative. 
 Abuse or neglect could have been perpetrated by a parent, guardian, or other individual in a 
caretaking role (e.g., person who was primarily responsible for caring for the victim when the abuse 
occurred, such as babysitter, older sibling sexually molesting victim). 
 This variable and “History of abuse and neglect as a child – 5.4.13” can be endorsed together if 
applicable. 
 Intimate partner is defined as a current or former girlfriend/boyfriend, dating partner, ongoing 
sexual partner, or spouse. It does not include instances of sex/intimacy in exchange for 
money/goods. There must be evidence of an intimate relationship (i.e., this does not apply to 
instances where there is simply attraction/infatuation between two individuals or in cases where 
one person is romantically interested in the other, but the feelings are not returned).  The definition 
of intimate partner does not require sexual intimacy. This definition includes same-sex partners. IPV 
might include physical violence, sexual violence, staking, and psychological aggression inflicted by an 
intimate partner. Sexual violence refers to sexual activity when consent is not obtained or not given 
freely (e.g., rape, sexual assault). 
 
 
11.3.16 SAVDVictimAbuseExperiences_PhysicalChildAbuse 
===== Page 239 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  239 | Page  
  
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim experienced ongoing or past experiences of physical abuse in 
childhood. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.3.17 SAVDVictimAbuseExperiences_SexualChildAbuse 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim experienced ongoing or past experiences of sexual abuse in 
childhood. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.3.18 SAVDVictimAbuseExperiences_EmotionalChildAbuse 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim experienced ongoing or past emotional (verbal or psychological) 
abuse in childhood. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
  
11.3.19 SAVDVictimAbuseExperiences_ChildNeglect 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim experienced ongoing or past neglect (physical, emotional, medical, or 
educational neglect) in childhood. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.3.20 SAVDVictimAbuseExperiences_IntimatePartnerViolence 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim experienced ongoing or past intimate partner violence or teen dating 
violence.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
===== Page 240 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  240 | Page  
  
 
 
11.3.21 SAVDVictimAbuseExperiences_SexualViolence 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim experienced ongoing or past sexual violence as an adult (e.g., rape, 
sexual assault).  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.4 SAVD Suspect Variables 
 
The SAVD suspect variables are on the NVDRS Suspect Tab and become available when an incident is 
identified by an abstractor as an SAVD.  
 
11.4.1 Had the suspect ever been arrested before the victim’s death? 
SAVDSuspect_PriorArrest 
 
Definition:  
This variable captures whether or not the suspect had ever been arrested prior to the victim’s death. 
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
9      Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
This variable expands NVDRS variable “Suspect recently in contact with law enforcement – 7.14” by 
allowing for a timeframe of arrest beyond 12 months prior to the fatal injury. Specifics about charges (if 
any) against the suspect do not have to be known to endorse this variable.  
 
 
11.4.2 At the time of the death, was the suspect perceived by self or others to have a 
problem with, or to be addicted to alcohol or other drugs? 
SAVDSuspect_AlcoholDrugUse 
 
Definition:  
This variable captures the suspect’s perceived drug or alcohol problems or addiction.  
 
Response Options: 
0 No 
1 Yes 
9 Unknown  
 
===== Page 241 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  241 | Page  
  
Discussion:  
Code as “Yes” if the suspect was perceived by self or others to have a problem with, or to be addicted 
to, alcohol or drugs. There does not need to be any indication that the alcohol or drug problem directly 
contributed to the death. “SAVDSuspect_AlcoholDrugUse” can be endorsed if a suspect was noted as 
using illicit drugs (such as heroin or cocaine), abusing prescription medications (such as pain relievers or 
Valium), or regularly using inhalants (e.g., sniffing gas). 
 
 A suspect who is noted as participating in an alcohol rehabilitation program or treatment — 
including self-help groups and 12-step programs — should be coded as “Yes” for 
“SAVDSuspect_AlcoholDrugUse” even if the victim was noted as being currently sober. 
 A problem from the past (i.e., five years or more ago) that has resolved and no longer appears to 
apply should not be coded. 
 Do not code if suspect was using alcohol or drugs in the hours preceding the incident, and there is 
no evidence of dependence or a problem.  
 If the suspect is mentioned as using illicit drugs, even if addiction or abuse is not specifically 
mentioned, code “SAVDSuspect_AlcoholDrugUse” as “Yes.” 
 The exception to this is marijuana use. For marijuana, the use must be noted as chronic, abusive, or 
problematic (e.g., “suspect smoked marijuana regularly,” “suspect’s family indicated he had been 
stoned much of the past month”). 
 If marijuana was used at the time of the incident, and there is no evidence of regular use, addiction, 
or abuse, code to “Other circumstance.” 
 The phrase “history of drug abuse” is sufficient to justify endorsing “SAVDSuspect_AlcoholDrugUse” 
unless it is noted that the suspect is no longer a drug user. 
 Previously attempting suicide via overdose is not sufficient justification for endorsing 
“SAVDSuspect_AlcoholDrugUse” in the absence of other information. 
 
 
11.4.3 What is the highest grade or year of school the suspect completed? 
SAVDSuspect_HighestGradeCompleted 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates the highest level of formal education obtained by the suspect.  
 
Response Options: 
1 Last completed grades K-11 
2 High school graduate or equivalency (e.g., GED) 
3 Trade school or some college 
4 College graduate or more 
5 Other 
9 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
This variable captures the suspect’s highest level of formal education completed or degree attained, per 
source documents.  
 
 If the suspect never attended school, endorse “5 – Other.” 
 
 
===== Page 242 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  242 | Page  
  
11.4.4 What is the suspect’s primary affiliation with the school associated with this death? 
SAVDSuspect_SchoolAffiliation 
 
Definition:  
This variable describes the suspect’s primary affiliation with the school associated with the death.  
 
Response Options: 
1 Student at this school 
2 Former student at this school   
3 Teacher, administrator, or other staff at this school 
4 Security guard or police officer 
5 Family member of a student or staff member at this school 
6 Resident of surrounding community 
7 Not associated with the school or community 
66 Other  (Fill in text)  
99 Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
Select the affiliation to the school that describes the closest and most primary relationship between the 
suspect and the school. For example, if a suspect is a resident of the surrounding community and a 
former student of the school, select “Former student at this school.” If “Other” is selected, fill in the text 
box to provide any available details.  
 
 
SAVD Suspect Crises Experienced/Did the suspect experience a crisis in any of the following 
areas within two weeks of the death (either prior or impending)? 
 
Definition:  
This variable asks, “Did the suspect experience a crisis in any of the following areas within two weeks of 
the death (either prior to the death or impending)?”  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check all that apply) 
 
 
11.4.5 SAVDSuspectCrisesExperienced_SchoolRelatedCrisis 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim experienced a crisis related to the school environment within two 
weeks of the death (either prior or impending).  
 
Discussion: 
 School-related crises include events that the suspect experiences related to the school environment 
(e.g., disciplinary infraction or events that might be experienced by larger groups or school-wide). 
Examples include:  
 
o Receiving a bad grade/report card  
o Getting expelled, suspended, or other disciplinary action  
===== Page 243 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  243 | Page  
  
o Disruption in school affiliation or schedule (e.g., being moved to a new school or placed 
on a different track, re-zoning of school) 
o School-wide conflict (e.g., racial conflict, conflict between clubs, groups, or 
organizations, experiencing bullying at school)  
 
 
11.4.6 SAVDSuspectCrisesExperienced_FamilyRelatedCrisis 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim experienced a family-related crisis within two weeks of the death 
(either prior or impending).  
 
Discussion: 
 Family-related crises encompass relationship problems with a family member other than an intimate 
partner. Examples include:  
 
o The suspect and his parents get into an argument which is noted as one of the triggers 
for the suspect’s plan to execute a mass school-shooting.  
o Guidance for “NVDRS Relationship Problem – 5.4” should also be followed.  
 
 
11.4.7 SAVDSuspectCrisesExperienced_RelationshipRelatedCrisis 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim experienced a crisis related to a relationship with an intimate partner 
or peer within two weeks of the death (either prior or impending). 
 
Discussion: 
 Relationship-related crises cover those encompassing intimate partner crisis and other relationship 
(e.g., friendship) crises. Examples include: 
 
o Suspect’s partner threatened a breakup within a week of the injury  
o Suspect and partner engaged in an argument hours before the injury  
o Suspect’s best friend posted a negative comment toward the suspect on social media 
the day before the injury   
 
 
11.4.8 SAVDSuspectCrisesExperienced_MentalHealthRelatedCrisis 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim experienced a mental health-related crisis within two weeks of the 
death (either prior or impending).  
 
Discussion: 
 Examples of mental health crises include: 
 
o Suspect receives mental health diagnosis 
===== Page 244 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  244 | Page  
  
o Suspect’s mental health condition abruptly changes or worsens within two weeks of the 
violence (such as, suspect experiencing a psychotic episode or victim fails to comply 
with medication and symptomatology increases) 
o Suspect experiences changes in care within two weeks of care (such as suspect was 
hospitalized, suspect’s therapist moves) 
 
 
11.4.9  SAVDSuspectCrisesExperienced_OtherCrisis 
11.4.9b SAVDSuspectCrisesExperienced_OtherCrisis_Text 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the victim experienced a crisis aside from those available to be endorsed in the 
SAVD module. Please use the open text field to specify the type of crisis the suspect experienced.  
 
Discussion: 
This variable is important to identify deaths that appear to involve an element of impulsivity in the 
context of a crisis. A “crisis” is a current/acute event (within 2 weeks of death) that is indicated in one of 
the source reports to have contributed to the death. Inclusion in the source document and indication 
that the event occurred within two weeks of the death is sufficient to code a circumstance as a crisis. 
Direct language that the event caused or contributed to the death is not required to endorse a crisis.  
Guidance for coding NVDRS crisis variables – 5.1.6 should also be followed for this crisis variable.  
 
 
11.4.10-11.4.18 Suspect Behavior/In the 12 months prior to this event did the suspect engage 
in any of the following behaviors? 
 
Definition: 
These variables indicate behavior in which the suspect engaged in the 12 months prior to the incident. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.4.10 SAVDSuspectBehavior_NameCallingTeasingBullying 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect engaged in name calling, teasing and/or bullying peers or school 
personnel (in person or online) in the 12 months prior to the incident. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
Discussion:  
Peers referenced in this variable did not have to attend the same school where the incident took place.  
 
 
11.4.11 SAVDSuspectBehavior_Sent threats 
===== Page 245 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  245 | Page  
  
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect sent verbal, written, or electronic threats in the 12 months prior to 
the incident. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.4.12 SAVDSuspectBehavior_Posted Threats 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect posted threats or manifestos online via social media or other 
platforms in the 12 months prior to the incident. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.4.13 SAVDSuspectBehavior_AlignedwithViolentIdeologiesOnline 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect participated in activity aligning themselves with violent ideologies in 
the 12 months prior to the incident.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.4.14 SAVDSuspectBehavior_PhysicallyThreatenedOthers 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect physically threatened or physically fought with peers in the 12 
months prior to the incident.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
Discussion:  
Peers referenced in this variable did not have to attend the same school where the incident took place.  
 
 
11.4.15 SAVDSuspectBehavior_DamagedStoleProperty 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect damaged or stole another's personal property or damaged school 
property in the 12 months prior to the incident.  
===== Page 246 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  246 | Page  
  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.4.16 SAVDSuspectBehavior_PossessedUsedIllicitSubstances 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect possessed or used illicit substances in the 12 months prior to the 
incident.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.4.17 SAVDSuspectBehavior_PossessedWeapon 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect possessed a weapon in the 12 months prior to the incident.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.4.18 SAVDSuspectBehavior_Other 
 
Definition:  
This free text field can be used to describe details or other notable information about the suspect’s 
behavior in the 12 months prior to the incident.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
Discussion: 
This variable captures behavior that the suspect engaged in within the year prior to the injury event. 
This information can provide context for what was happening in the suspect’s life that might have 
contributed to risk for the injury; however, the behavior does not necessarily need to be related to the 
incident for it to be endorsed. 
 
 
11.4.19-11.4.22 Prior Victimization of Suspect/In the 12 months prior to this event was the 
suspect victimized in any of the following ways?  
 
Definition: 
These variables capture victimization experiences of the suspect within the 12 months prior to the 
incident.  
 
===== Page 247 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  247 | Page  
  
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
Discussion: 
These variables capture prior victimization of the suspect within the year prior to the incident. This 
information can provide context for what was happening in the suspect’s life that might have 
contributed to risk for the injury; however, the behavior does not necessarily need to be related to the 
incident for it to be endorsed. These variables should not capture the fatal injury, but events prior to the 
fatal injury.  
 
 
11.4.19 SAVDSuspectPriorVictimization_CalledNamesTeasedBullied 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect experienced name calling, teasing and/or bullying by peers or 
school personnel (in person or online) in the 12 months prior to the incident. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
Discussion:  
Peers referenced in this variable did not have to attend the same school where the incident took place.  
 
 
11.4.20 SAVDSuspectPriorVictimization_PropertyDamagedStolen 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect had their personal property damaged or stolen in the 12 months 
prior to the incident.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.4.21 SAVDSuspectPriorVictimization_ReceivedThreats 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect received verbal, written, or electronic threats in the 12 months 
prior to the incident. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.4.22 SAVDSuspectPriorVictimization_PhysicallyThreatenedAssaulted 
 
Definition:  
===== Page 248 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  248 | Page  
  
This variable indicates if the suspect was physically assaulted or threatened by peers in the 12 months 
prior to the incident. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
Discussion:  
Peers referenced in this variable did not have to attend the same school where the incident took place.  
 
 
11.4.23-11.4.28  Suspect Abuse Experiences/Did the suspect experience any of the following? 
 
Definition: These variables indicate if the suspect experienced ongoing or past experiences of abuse, 
neglect, or other forms of victimization.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable) 
 
Discussion: 
Abuse or neglect experienced by the suspect does not have to be related to the incident in order to be 
endorsed. This variable expands the NVDRS variable “History of abuse or neglect as a child – 5.4.13” by 
allowing the type of abuse/neglect to be specified and allowing forms of victimization that can occur but 
are not necessarily related to the incident (i.e., intimate partner violence, sexual violence).  
 
 Endorse abuse and neglect variables if the suspect experienced child abuse/neglect at any point in 
the past even if the victim is currently an adult. 
 Endorse if evidence of ongoing abuse is suspected, but not confirmed. Endorse if autopsy evidence 
from official records (i.e., C/ME, hospital examination report) describes anatomical evidence of old 
or healing injuries as an indication of previous abuse. 
 Abuse can be physical, psychological, sexual or others if the source document refers to “abuse.” If 
the abuse is unspecified and happened in childhood endorse “History of abuse and neglect as a child 
– 5.4.13.” If “abuse” is mentioned in source documents but the type of abuse and timing (i.e., 
childhood versus adulthood) is not specified, do not endorse these variables. Instead, indicate in the 
narrative that abuse was mentioned in the source documents. 
 Neglect may be physical, emotional, medical, or educational. 
 Indicate the nature of the abuse or neglect in the incident narrative. 
 Abuse or neglect could have been perpetrated by a parent, guardian, or other individual in a 
caretaking role (e.g., person who was primarily responsible for caring for the victim when the abuse 
occurred, such as babysitter, older sibling sexually molesting victim). 
 This variable and “History of abuse and neglect as a child – 5.4.13” can be endorsed together if 
applicable. 
 Intimate partner is defined as a current or former girlfriend/boyfriend, dating partner, ongoing 
sexual partner, or spouse. It does not include instances of sex/intimacy in exchange for 
money/goods. There must be evidence of an intimate relationship (this does not apply to instances 
where there is simply attraction/infatuation between two individuals or in cases where one person 
is romantically interested in the other, but the feelings are not returned).  The definition of intimate 
partner does not require sexual intimacy. This definition includes same-sex partners. IPV can include 
physical violence, sexual violence, staking, and psychological aggression inflicted by an intimate 
===== Page 249 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  249 | Page  
  
partner.  
 Sexual violence refers to sexual activity when consent is not obtained or not given freely (e.g., rape, 
sexual assault). 
 
 
11.4.23 SAVDSuspectAbuseExperiences_PhysicalChildAbuse 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect experienced ongoing or past experiences of physical abuse in 
childhood. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.4.24 SAVDSuspectAbuseExperiences_SexualChildAbuse 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect experienced ongoing or past experiences of sexual abuse in 
childhood. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.4.25 SAVDSuspectAbuseExperiences_EmotionalChildAbuse 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect experienced ongoing or past emotional (verbal or psychological) 
abuse in childhood. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.4.26 SAVDSuspectAbuseExperiences_ChildNeglect 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect experienced ongoing or past neglect (physical, emotional, medical, 
or educational neglect) in childhood. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.4.27 SAVDSuspectAbuseExperiences_IntimatePartnerViolence 
 
===== Page 250 =====
 
Section 11. School-Associated Violent Death Module  250 | Page  
  
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect experienced ongoing or past intimate partner violence or teen 
dating violence.  
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
11.4.28 SAVDSuspectAbuseExperiences_SexualViolence 
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates if the suspect experienced ongoing or past sexual violence as an adult (e.g., rape, 
sexual assault).  
 
Re
sponse Option: 
Checkbox (Check if applicable)  
 
 
 
 
===== Page 251 =====
 
Section 12. Public Safety Officer Suicide Module  251 | Page  
  
SECTION 12: PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICER SUICIDE (PSOS) MODULE 
 
Public safety officers (PSOs) may be at increased risk of suicide because of the stresses associated with 
their position. This module allows states to capture additional information on suicides classified as 
public safety officer suicide (PSOS) incidents. PSOS incidents are defined as incidents in which a PSO dies 
by suicide. The suicide may have happened on or off duty and with or without the use of a work-issued 
weapon. PSOs are considered for inclusion if the person served in a public service agency in an official 
capacity, including a paid or volunteer position. Additionally, individuals who have retired from a PSO 
occupation are included.  
Note: The PSOS Module and corresponding variables were added in January 2022. Data collection for 
the PSOS Module applies to eligible deaths occurring on and after January 1, 2022. 
 
12.1 Definition of Public Safety Officer 
 
A PSO is defined as: All local, state, federal, military, and tribal law enforcement, corrections officers, 
parole/probation officers, officers of the court, firefighters, emergency medical service clinicians 
(emergency medical technicians [EMTs], paramedics, advanced emergency medical technicians [AEMTs], 
emergency medical responders [EMRs], etc.), and public safety telecommunicators (e.g., 911 operators 
and dispatchers).   
 
The following are examples of North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) codes that 
identify PSO occupations, excluding 911 telecommunicators:   
 
 Police Protection (NAICS = 92212) 
 Correctional Institutions (NAICS = 92214) 
 Fire Protection (NAICS = 92216) 
 Ambulance Services (NAICS = 62191) 
 
Military NAICS codes are not available for military-based Public Safety Officers because there are more 
general NAICS codes that capture military personnel by branch of service. Standardized Occupational 
Classification (SOC) codes are often used to identify specific workers (or specific occupations) including 
911 telecommunicators. The SOC code for 911 telecommunicators is 43-5031. Also use SOC as indicated 
in Section 3.2.1 Usual Occupation Variables in the coding manual guidance for industry and occupation. 
The link is also included here: https://www.census.gov/topics/employment/industry-
occupation/guidance/code-lists.html. 
  
Note: It is not required for there to be a corresponding NAICS or SOC code for every victim. Additionally, 
there will often be cases in which the SOC or NAICS codes are not provided; however, the victim would 
still be considered to be a PSO based on the text description of their current and/or usual occupation or 
industry from the DC or their current occupation as described in other source documents. The codes, if 
available, may be used in conjunction with other information from the source documents to determine 
if a victim should be classified as a PSO. These codes are also useful for purposes of defining cases in 
later analyses using NVDRS data.  
In cases where the occupation of the PSO does not fit into one of the above categories, including 
individuals who were in a volunteer position or retired, provide this information as part of the C/ME or 
LE narrative. PSOs in volunteer roles and/or who were retired at time of their death are included in the 
case definition and their information should be captured.   
===== Page 252 =====
 
Section 12. Public Safety Officer Suicide Module  252 | Page  
  
 
 
12.2 PSOS Inclusion Criteria 
 
 
 12.2.1 This is a Public Safety Officer Suicide/PSOS Case: PSOS_Case  
 
Definition:  
This variable indicates whether the death is considered a PSOS. 
 
Response Option: 
Checkbox 
 
 
12.3 Agency, Role, and Status 
 
 
 Type of agency 
 12.3.1 Type of agency (Agency 1): PSOS_Agency1  
 12.3.2 Subtype of agency (Agency 1): PSOS_Agency1_Sub 
 12.3.3 Type of agency if other (Agency 1): PSOS_Agency1_Other 
 12.3.4 Type of agency (Agency 2): PSOS_Agency2  
 12.3.5 Subtype of agency (Agency 2): PSOS_Agency2Sub 
 12.3.6 Type of agency if other (Agency 2): PSOS_Agency2_Other 
 
Definition: 
This variable is meant to capture the type of agency where the PSO was working or volunteering for at 
the time of their death.   
 
Response Options:  
Law enforcement  
 State law enforcement  
 Campus police  
      City/county/town law enforcement  
      Tribal law enforcement  
      Federal law enforcement  
      Private law enforcement (non-governmental)  
 Unspecified 
Fire department   
      City/county/town fire department  
      Federal fire agency         
 State fire department  
 Un specified 
Emergency Medical Services  
       Private EMS agency (non-governmental)  
       City/county/town EMS agency  
       Federal EMS agency  
===== Page 253 =====
 
Section 12. Public Safety Officer Suicide Module  253 | Page  
  
       Tribal EMS agency  
       Campus EMS agency  
        State EMS agency  
 Air Medical Agency (e.g., air ambulance service)  
 Urban Search and Rescue 
 Unspecified 
Military   
 Air Force  
 Air National Guard 
 Army  
 Coast Guard  
 Marine Corps  
 National Guard 
 Navy  
 Space Force 
Jail/Corrections facility   
Court   
       Federal court  
      State court  
       Local jurisdiction court  
 Unspecified 
911/Telecommunications Agency  
     State 911 agency  
       City/county/town 911 agency  
       Tribal 911 agency  
       Federal 911 agency  
 Unspecified 
Other (free text) 
Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
Use the dropdown list to select the type of agency. For LE, fire department, EMS, court, and 
911/telecommunications agencies, a second dropdown will allow you to further specify the type of 
agency within that category. Be sure to report the most recent agency where the victim worked, which 
can be in a paid or unpaid role. There is an additional “Type of agency” variable to account for victims 
who work in more than one agency simultaneously (e.g., a paramedic who works in one department and 
volunteers as a paramedic supervisor in another). In the event that the victim worked and/or 
volunteered in more than one agency, list the primary agency as the one where they worked the 
majority of hours. If a victim was working in multiple agencies and it is unclear how many hours the 
victim worked in each agency, select “Other.” 
 
 
 Public Safety Officer Role 
 12.3.7 Type of role 1: PSOS_Role1  
 12.3.8 Subtype of role 1: PSOS_Role1_Sub 
 12.3.9 Type of role 1 if other: PSOS_Role1_Other 
 12.3.10 Type of role 2: PSOS_Role2  
 12.3.11 Subtype of role 2: PSOS_Role2Sub 
===== Page 254 =====
 
Section 12. Public Safety Officer Suicide Module  254 | Page  
  
 12.3.12 Type of role 2 if other: PSOS_Role2_Other 
 
Definition: 
This variable is meant to capture the specific role or position in which the victim served as a PSO. This 
variable is in addition to the occupation variables on the DC and in the general demographics tab of 
NVDRS.  
 
Response Options:  
Law enforcement role 
 LE Officer Role (e.g., police, corrections, probation, parole, and judicial officer) 
 LE, Supervisor Role (e.g., Sergeant, Lieutenant, Captain, Commissioner) 
 LE, Unspecified Role 
Firefighting role 
 Firefighter Role (e.g., Firefighter, Wildland Firefighter) 
 Firefighter, Supervisor Role (e.g., Fire chief, Lieutenant, Commissioner, Captain) 
 Firefighter, Unspecified Role 
Emergency Medical Services role 
 Emergency Medical Service Clinician (e.g., paramedic, A-EMT, EMT, EMR) 
 Emergency Medical Service, Supervisor Role (Chief, Captain, Preceptor, etc.) 
 Other Emergency Medical Service Clinician (e.g., Flight nurse, doctor)  
 Emergency Medical Service Role, Unspecified Role 
Public Safety Telecommunications role 
 Public Safety Telecommunicators (e.g., 911 Telecommunicator, Dispatchers, Tactical dispatch) 
 Public Safety Telecommunicators, Supervisor Role 
 Public Safety Telecommunicators, Unspecified Role 
Other (free text) 
Unknown 
 
Discussion: 
Use the dropdown list to select the type of role. For LE, fire department, EMS, court, and 
911/telecommunications roles, a second dropdown will allow you to further specify the type of role 
within that grouping. Be sure to report the most recent role in which the victim worked, which can be in 
a paid or unpaid. There is an additional “Public Safety Officer Role” variable to account for victims who 
work in more than one PSO role simultaneously (e.g., this would capture an instance where the victim 
was a paid paramedic and a volunteer paramedic supervisor). In the event that the victim worked 
and/or volunteered in more than one role, list the primary role as the one where they worked the 
majority of hours. If a victim was working in multiple roles and it is unclear how many hours the victim 
worked in each role, select “Other.”  Be sure to report the most recently listed position of the victim per 
the source documents even if the DC states a different occupation. In the case of military or court PSO, 
specify the type of role the victim was performing. For instance, a military police officer would be 
classified as an LE officer. 
 
Note: Other Emergency Service Clinician is meant to capture doctors, nurses, or other clinicians who 
were serving in a pre-hospital emergency function (e.g., flight nurse , flight doctor). Clinicians working in 
non-emergency responder functions should not be coded here (e.g., an Emergency Medicine doctor 
working their regular shift in the emergency room).  
 
 
===== Page 255 =====
 
Section 12. Public Safety Officer Suicide Module  255 | Page  
  
 Pay Status  
 12.3.13 PSOS_PayStatus_FT  
 12.3.14 PSOS_PayStatus_PT  
 12.3.15 PSOS_PayStatus_Oncall  
 12.3.16 PSOS_PayStatus_Volunteer 
 12.3.17 PSOS_PayStatus_N/A  
 12.3.18 PSOS_PayStatus_Other 
 12.3.19 PSOS_PayStatus_Unknown 
 12.3.20 PSOS_PayStatus_Other_Text 
 
Definition:  
This variable captures the PSO’s pay status at time of death with regards to their PSO role.  
 
Response Options (Check all that apply): 
Paid, full-time 
Paid, part-time  
Paid, on call 
Volunteer  
N/A (e.g., retired) 
Unknown 
Other 
 
Discussion: 
There will be instances where the victim was serving in multiple roles and may have different pay 
statuses for those roles. In those instances, be sure to check all that apply. For example, a victim may be 
working as a full-time firefighter in one agency and volunteering as a firefighter in another agency. 
Additionally, there are PSOs who will complete additional paid shifts in other agencies to earn extra 
money. It is important to capture any roles or positions in which a PSO was serving at the time of their 
death.    
 
 
 12.3.21 Active versus Retired: PSOS_ActiveRetired  
 
Definition:  
This variable is meant to capture the employment status of the PSO at the time of their death.  
 
Response Options:  
1 Active  
2 Retired 
66 Other 
88 N/A (e.g., volunteer) 
99 Unknown 
 
Discussion:  
Endorse this variable if the victim is documented as being active or retired from their profession or in an 
unspecified or “Other” status. This variable applies to both volunteer and paid PSOs. Active refers to any 
PSO actively working and employed by an agency in any capacity, including full-time, part-time, or a 
volunteer. Retired is defined as someone who has permanently left their position with no intention of 
===== Page 256 =====
 
Section 12. Public Safety Officer Suicide Module  256 | Page  
  
returning. “66 – Other” may be selected in instances where the decedent was on a leave of absence 
(e.g., medical leave, disciplinary suspension, absent without leave [AWOL]). 
 
 
12.4 PSOS Work Environment Variables 
 
 
 12.4.1 History of chronic or acute traumatic work-related event: 
 PSOS_ChronicAcuteInjury_History 
 
Definition:  
This variable is meant to capture whether source documents noted that the PSO was involved in, 
assisted with, or responded to any traumatic work-related event(s).  
 
Response Options:  
Checkbox 
 
Discussion:  
This variable considers chronic or acute work-related event(s) broadly. The event(s) may cause periods 
of anxiety, distress, psychological and/or physical stress, emotional turmoil, or performance change 
within the victim. Examples of acute or chronic traumatic work-related events include moments where 
one faces a threat of serious injury, harm, or death toward the self or others. The event may have 
directly affected or been witnessed by the victim. If the source documents mention exposure, that is 
enough to endorse this variable.  
  
 
 12.4.2 Timing of most recent chronic or acute traumatic work-related event: 
 PSOS_ChronicAcuteInjury_Timing   
 
Definition: This variable is meant to capture the timing and/or onset of the most recent traumatic 
event.  
 
Response Options:  
1 Last 7 days 
2 8 days to 30 days  
3 31 days to 12 months  
4 Longer than 12 months 
66 Other 
99 Timing unknown 
 
Discussion:  
This variable is meant to capture the most recent traumatic work-related event. If the trauma was 
chronic and there is no specific timing associated with it, select “99 – Timing unknown.” Only complete if 
you endorsed “Yes” for the variable “History of chronic or acute traumatic work-related event.” If the 
source documents report that the event was recent, without more specific timing details, endorse “66 – 
Other.” We think of this as different than timing “Unknown” because there was some description of 
timing is just nonspecific.  
===== Page 257 =====
 
Section 12. Public Safety Officer Suicide Module  257 | Page  
  
 
 
 12.4.3 Type of chronic or acute traumatic work-related event: PSOS_ChronicAcuteInjury_Type   
 
Definition: This variable is meant to capture the specific type of chronic or acute traumatic work-related 
event(s) the PSO was involved in, assisted with, or responded to. This variable is to be completed if 
“History of chronic or acute traumatic work-related event” is “Yes.” 
 
Response Option:  
Text 
 
Discussion: 
Complete this variable if the source documents indicated that the victim was involved in, assisted with, 
or responded to any event such as a mass casualty event, natural or man-made disaster (e.g., bombing, 
hurricane, pandemic, or other infectious disease epidemic or outbreak), domestic violence call, active 
shooter situation, fatal motor vehicle accident, other events involving loss of human life, , observing 
child death in the line of duty, response to calls for service for suicide, collapsing structure, explosion, 
and high-profile media coverage of these events (e.g., 9/11, COVID-19). Additionally, use this variable to 
capture chronic traumatic events like repeated exposure to life threatening situations or extreme levels 
of stress. The traumatic event(s) may have caused periods of anxiety, distress, psychological and/or 
physical stress, and emotional turmoil for the victim. 
 
 
 12.4.4 Referred to Employee Assistance Program (EAP) or mental health services:   
 PSOS_EAP 
 
Definition:  
This variable is meant to capture if the PSO was ever encouraged to reach out to, was referred to, or 
connected with their EAP, wellness systems, or any other mental health support/resources. 
 
Response Options:  
Checkbox 
 
Discussion: 
Endorse if the decedent was referred to or involved in EAP or mental health services such as Officer 
Safety and Wellness, EAP, work-related mental health supports/resources, Share the Load Support 
Program (for firefighters), Law Enforcement Mental Health and Wellness Act Program, wellness/fitness 
Initiatives, Peer Support Teams, and Critical Incident Stress Management Teams.  
 
 
 Work-related stressors  
  12.4.5 PSOS_WorkRelatedStressors_homicide  
  12.4.6 PSOS_WorkRelatedStressors_suicide  
  12.4.7 PSOS_WorkRelatedStressors_seriousinjurycoworker    
  12.4.8 PSOS_WorkRelatedStressors_coworkerconflict  
  12.4.9 PSOS_WorkRelatedStressors_psychological  
  12.4.10 PSOS_WorkRelatedStressors_burnout  
===== Page 258 =====
 
Section 12. Public Safety Officer Suicide Module  258 | Page  
  
  12.4.11 PSOS_WorkRelatedStressors_shiftwork  
  12.4.12 PSOS_WorkRelatedStressors_HR  
  12.4.13 PSOS_WorkRelatedStressors_retirement  
  12.4.14 PSOS_WorkRelatedStressors_otherfreetext  
 
Definition: 
PSOs are exposed to a myriad of work-related stressors that may be chronic and/or acute. The intent of 
this variable is to capture these stressors. The list of stressors included in the response options is not 
meant to be exhaustive but rather meant to capture work-related stressors more commonly 
experienced by PSOs. If there is a stressor that is different from the ones listed, please include it in the 
“Other” category and specify. 
 
Response Options (Check all that apply):  
Homicide of colleague  
Suicide of colleague  
Witness to serious injury of a colleague 
Interpersonal conflict with partner, crew, or other co-worker  
Psychological stress of work  
Signs or feelings of burnout 
Shift-work related stress  
Personnel/Human resources issues 
Recent/Upcoming retirement 
Other (free text) 
 
Discussion: 
Endorse this variable if, per the source documents, you have evidence that the victim was experiencing a 
work-related stressor. Work-related stress can come in many forms. Below is a list of definitions for 
response options that fall under “Work-related stressors.” 
 
Homicide of colleague: Victim experienced the homicide of a work partner/colleague. This response 
option should be selected regardless of whether the death occurred in the line of duty. The victim is not 
required to have been a witness to the event.  
 
Suicide of colleague: Victim experienced the suicide of a work partner/colleague. This response option 
should be selected regardless of whether the death occurred in the line of duty. The victim is not 
required to have been a witness to the event. 
 
Witness to serious injury of a colleague: Victim witnessed the serious injury to a partner/colleague. This 
response option should be selected regardless of whether the serious injury occurred in the line of duty.  
 
Interpersonal conflict with partner, crew, or other co-worker: Victim was reported to have experienced 
stress related to interpersonal conflict with a colleague regardless of whether the conflict occurred on or 
off duty.  
 
Psychological stress of work: Victim was reported to have psychological stress related to work. 
Examples include, but are not limited to, traumatic work exposure (e.g., witness to mass casualty event), 
response to call for a suicide, violence experienced against victim or coworkers, response to a call for a 
suicidal person, violence toward self or coworkers, responding to a pediatric emergency (fatal and non-
===== Page 259 =====
 
Section 12. Public Safety Officer Suicide Module  259 | Page  
  
fatal), death of a patient or person in custody during or after responding to the scene, or the 
psychological stress of repeated/constant exposure to trauma. 
 
Signs or feelings of burnout: Vi ctim was reported to have shown signs of or expressed feelings of 
burnout. Burnout is defined as a syndrome conceptualized as resulting from chronic work-related stress 
that is usually characterized by three dimensions: feelings of energy depletion or exhaustion, increased 
mental distance from one's job, or feelings of negativism or cynicism related to one's job, or reduced 
professional efficiency.  
 
S
hift-work related stress: Victim was reported to have experienced stress related to shift work. 
Examples include, but are not limited to, interrupted sleep, circadian rhythm-related stress, mandatory 
overtime or holdovers, and or shiftwork generally. 
 
Personnel/Human resources issues: Victim was reported to have experienced stress related to 
personnel/human resources. Examples include, but are not limited to, work-related racism, 
discrimination, or harassment, poor performance evaluation, being denied or passed over for a 
promotion, Internal Affairs investigation, or history of disciplinary action at work.  
 
Recent/Upcoming retirement: Victim was reported to have experienced stress related to a recent or 
upcoming retirement.  
 
Other: Endorse if the victim was reported to have any other work-related stressor that is thought to 
have contributed to their death. Please fill in the details in the free text box.  
 
 
12.5 PSOS Injury Detail Variables 
 
 
 12.5.1 Duty status at time of injury: PSOS_DutyStatus 
Definition: 
 
This variable is meant to capture the duty status of the PSO when the fatal injury occurred.  
 
Response Options:  
1 On duty 
2 Off duty 
66 Other 
99 Unknown 
 
Discussion: Endorse “1 – On duty” if the injury occurred while the PSO was working their scheduled 
shift, overtime, or was called in to work unexpectedly. Endorse “2 – Off duty” if the injury occurred any 
time outside of the PSO’s scheduled work hours. Endorse “66 – Other” if the PSO was in an on-call status 
or retired. Examples of “On duty” include any time period where the PSO is dedicating a set number of 
hours at their workplace. A PSO can be working their shift at any location necessitated by their duties, 
including dispatch locations and places encountered en route while performing work-related duties. 
 
 
===== Page 260 =====
 
Section 12. Public Safety Officer Suicide Module  260 | Page  
  
 12.5.2 Decedent affected by chronic or acute work-related injury/disability: 
 PSOS_ChronicAcuteInjuryDisability  
 
Definition:  
This variable is meant to capture whether the PSO had suffered any work-related injury(ies) or 
disability(ies).  
 
Response Options:  
Checkbox 
 
Discussion: 
Endorse this variable if the decedent suffered and/or was diagnosed with any acute, chronic, or long-
term injury or disability while working in the PSO role or due to the work environment. The incidents 
include, but are not limited to, chronic and acute physical, mental, or neurological injuries or disabilities. 
For injuries that may have occurred before the PSO’s suicide, only endorse if the injury was thought to 
have contributed to the suicide. Examples include work-related illnesses or conditions such as: 
respiratory ailments associated with smoke, burns or corrosion, gunshot wounds, puncture wounds, 
amputation, concussion, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, emphysema, traumatic brain injury, 
back injury, post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety or depressive disorder, traumatic injury to body  
(e.g., nerves, spinal cord, muscles, bones, ligaments, etc.), and/or other injury/disability.  
 
 
Detail about where fatal injury occurred  
        12.5.3 PSOS_InjuryLocation_Workvehicle  
 12.5.4 PSOS_InjuryLocation_Worksite 
 12.5.5 PSOS_InjuryLocation_Trainingsite 
 12.5.6 PSOS_InjuryLocation_Militarypost 
 12.5.7 PSOS_InjuryLocation_Dispatchlocation 
 12.5.8 PSOS_InjuryLocation_Field 
 12.5.9 PSOS_InjuryLocation_ShootingRange 
 12.5.10 PSOS_InjuryLocation_Courthouse 
 12.5.11 PSOS_InjuryLocation_CorrectionalFacility 
 12.5.12 PSOS_InjuryLocation_Other 
 12.5.13 PSOS_InjuryLocation_Unknown 
 12.5.14 PSOS_InjuryLocation_NA 
 
Definition: 
This variable captures additional details about where the suicide of a PSO occurred. 
 
Response Options (Check all that apply): 
Work/Service vehicle  
Work site (e.g., firehouse, police department) 
Training site (police academy, fire academy) 
Military installation/post 
Dispatch location (responding to a call) 
In the field (includes both dispatched & non-dispatched) 
Shooting range 
Courthouse 
===== Page 261 =====
 
Section 12. Public Safety Officer Suicide Module  261 | Page  
  
Jail/Corrections facility 
Unknown 
Other 
 
Discussion: 
This variable is meant to capture additional information on where the fatal injury occurred that is unique 
to PSOs and distinct from the variable, “Type of location where injury occurred” in NVDRS. N/A should 
be used when all relevant injury location information is already captured in the “Type of location where 
injury occurred” variable on the Injury and Death tab.  
 
 
12.6 PSOS Weapon Variables 
 
 
12.6.1 Injury weapon was a work-issued firearm: PSOS_Firearm  
 
Definition: This variable is meant to capture whether the firearm used in the PSO’s death was a service 
weapon or work-issued weapon.   
 
Response Options:  
Checkbox 
 
Discussion: Endorse if source documents note that the firearm used to inflict the fatal injury was work-
issued. The variable is not restricted to only law enforcement officers. If information is not available 
regarding whether the firearm was work-issued, do not assume the firearm was work-issued and do not 
endorse. 
===== Page 262 =====
 
Section 13. Appendices  262 | Page  
  
SECTION 13: APPENDICES  
 
 
Appendix A is a decision-tree intended to assist states in determining which state enters an incident in 
the NVDRS web-based system when the incident crosses state lines or a resident was fatally injured in 
another state. The decision-tree can be used by states collecting statewide data and states with pilot 
years. 
 
Appendix B includes an overview of the National Violent Death Reporting System (NVDRS) and the State 
Unintentional Drug Overdose Reporting System (SUDORS)  
 
NVDRS uses information from death certificates (DC), coroner/medical examiner (C/ME) reports, and 
law enforcement (LE) reports to provide a complete picture of violent deaths. The case definition for 
NVDRS includes homicides, suicides, unintentional firearm deaths, deaths of undetermined intent 
(including opioid overdose deaths of undetermined intent), deaths due to legal intervention (excluding 
executions), and deaths due to terrorism. Information from NVDRS can be used to characterize violent 
deaths and inform, develop, and guide violence prevention programs. 
SUDORS uses information from DCs and C/ME reports for unintentional drug overdose deaths, and from 
DCs, C/ME reports, and LE reports for drug overdose deaths of undetermined intent (LE data for drug 
overdose deaths of undetermined intent are required for NVDRS but not for SUDORS and therefore do 
not have to be entered by the 8-month SUDORS data entry deadline; see details in table below). The 
case definition for SUDORS includes drug overdose deaths that are either unintentional or of 
undetermined intent. Information from SUDORS can be used to characterize drug overdose deaths and 
inform, develop, and guide overdose prevention programs. 
Both NVDRS and SUDORS data collection take place using the NVDRS web-based system. SUDORS and 
NVDRS collect information for different cases, with one exception: drug overdose deaths of 
undetermined intent. These cases should only be entered once in the web-based system, but within the 
scope of both SUDORS and NVDRS, and should be coded using abstractor manner of death “9-
undetermined intent” and incident type “1-NVDRS” (incident category values of “5-single death of 
undetermined intent” or “10-multiple deaths of undetermined intent” will be used to identify deaths of 
undetermined intent from the broader NVDRS incident type) in the web-based system.  
The content in this document (e.g., data closeout dates, etc.) is for informational purposes only and 
should not be used as a substitute for the Notice of Funding Opportunity Announcement for either 
program – SUDORS and NVDRS. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
===== Page 263 =====
 
Section 13. Appendices  263 | Page  
  
Appendix A 
 

===== Page 264 =====
 
  264 | Page  
Section 13: Appendices  
Appendix B 
Deaths collected by SUDORS, by NVDRS, and by both SUDORS and NVDRS 
 
 
  

===== Page 265 =====
2 65 | Page
Section 13: Appendices  
DEATH 
MANNER/TYPE 
DEATH MANNER/TYPE FOR DEATHS INCLUDED IN SUDORS, NVDRS, OR BOTH 
 
SUDORS-only cases 
Unintentional 
drug overdose 
deaths 
SUDORS and NVDRS 
cases* 
Drug overdose 
deaths of 
undetermined intent 
 
NVDRS-only cases 
Suicides 
Homicides 
Legal intervention 
deaths 
Unintentional firearm 
deaths 
Deaths of 
undetermined intent 
other than drug 
overdose deaths 
Abstractor 
Manner of 
Death 
- 11 Unintentional 
poisoning 
- 9 Undetermined intent - 1 Suicide or intentional self-
harm 
- 2 Homicide 
- 3 Unintentional firearm - 
self-inflicted 
- 4 Unintentional firearm - 
inflicted by other person 
- 5 Unintentional firearm - 
unknown who inflicted 
- 6 Legal intervention (by 
police or other authority) 
- 7 Terrorism homicide 
- 8 Terrorism suicide 
- 9 Undetermined intent 
Incident type - 3 SUDORS - 1 NVDRS (with Incident 
Category 5-single death 
of undetermined intent 
or 10-multiple deaths of 
undetermined intent) 
- 1 NVDRS 
- 2 NVDRS Non-Targeted Area 
- 3 SUDORS 
- 9 Other (State-Defined) 
*Only entered once in the web-based system, but within scope of both SUDORS and NVDRS  
===== Page 266 =====
 
  266 | Page  
Section 13: Appendices  
Of NOTE: For OPTIONAL Data Collection  
Grantees can enter data into the web-based system for other types of deaths that are not part of the 
SUDORS or NVDRS case definitions (e.g., motor vehicle crashes without intent to injure). For these 
deaths, the following must be used:  
Abstractor Manner of Death = “10 Other unintentional death (outside NVDRS case definition)”  
Incident Type = “9 Other (State-Defined)”  
 
If grantees want to enter data for drug-r elated deaths other than drug overdose deaths (e.g., drowning 
while intoxicated), the following must be used: 
 Abstractor Manner of Death =  “11 Unintentional poisoning” 
Incident Type = “9 Other (State-Defined)”  
 
1. Required data fields in web-based system  
a. NVDRS cases  
i. A ll data fields are required on all tabs except the Intimate Partner Violence (IPV), 
Child Fatality Review (CFR), and Overdose (OD) tabs, which are optional. 
b. S UDORS cases  
i. Fo r unintentional drug overdose deaths:  
1. Certain data fields are optional on the Demographics, Injury and Death, and 
Circumstances tabs.  
2. All data fields on the Weapons and Toxicology tabs are required.  
3. All but 3 specific data fields on the OD tab are required.  
4. Data fields on the Suspects, IPV, and CFR tabs are optional.  
ii. Fo r drug overdose deaths of undetermined intent:  
1. All data fields are required on the Demographics, Injury and Death, 
Circumstances, Toxicology, and OD tabs (except 3 specific fields on the OD 
tab).  
2. D ata fields on the IPV and CFR tabs are optional.  
 
c. Required fields and Narrative guidance for NVDRS and SUDORS cases are detailed below: 
 
 
 
 
 
  
===== Page 267 =====
 
  267 | Page  
Section 13: Appendices  
TAB REQUIRED FIELDS 
 
SUDORS-only cases 
Unintentional drug 
overdose deaths 
SUDORS and 
NVDRS cases* 
Drug overdose deaths 
of undetermined 
intent 
 
NVDRS-only cases 
Suicides 
Homicides 
Legal intervention 
deaths 
Unintentional firearm 
deaths 
Deaths of 
undetermined intent 
other than drug 
overdose deaths 
Demographics - All required except (and 
it is strongly 
encouraged to include 
the following if 
available): 
o D ay of birth  
o First initial of last 
name 
o Last 4 of C/ME 
number 
o Last 4 of DC number 
o US Census Tract and 
Block Group of 
Residence  
- All required except 
(and it is strongly 
encouraged to include 
the following if 
available): 
o D ay of birth  
o First initial of last 
name 
o Last 4 of C/ME 
number 
o Last 4 of DC 
number 
- All required except 
(and it is strongly 
encouraged to include 
the following if 
available): 
o D ay of birth  
o First initial of last 
name 
o Last 4 of C/ME 
number 
o Last 4 of DC 
number 
Injury and 
death  
- All required except (and 
it is strongly 
encouraged to include 
the following if 
available and relevant): 
o M anner of death 
per LE 
o US Census Tract and 
Block Group of 
Where Injury 
Occurred 
o Hospital ICD-9-CM 
and ICD-10-CM 
codes 
o Number and 
location of wounds  
- All required - All required 
===== Page 268 =====
 
  268 | Page  
Section 13: Appendices  
Circumstances   - All C/ME fields required 
in “Mental Health, 
Substance Abuse, and 
other Addictions” 
section 
- All C/ME fields required 
in the 
“Suicide/Undetermined 
Specific Circumstances” 
portion of the “Manner 
Specific Circumstances 
for Homicide and 
Suicide Deaths,” except 
the “Life Stressors” 
fields 
- All other fields optional 
-  All required as 
applicable (including 
   C/ME and LE 
circumstances) 
- All required as 
applicable (including 
C/ME and LE 
circumstances) 
Weapons - Required to enter 
“poisoning” as weapon 
- Required to enter 
“poisoning” as weapon 
- All required 
Suspects - None - All required (if 
applicable) 
- All required (if 
applicable) 
Toxicology - All required, required to 
enter all detected 
drugs, (i.e., positive 
result), including  
metabolites 
- All required, required 
to enter all detected 
drugs (i.e., positive 
result), including 
metabolites 
- All required, required 
to enter all detected 
drugs (i.e., positive 
result) 
OD - All required except: 
o Number of opioid 
prescriptions in 30 
days preceding 
injury 
o Number of 
pharmacies 
dispensing opioids 
to decedent in 180 
days preceding 
injury 
o Number of doctors 
writing opioid 
prescriptions to 
decedent in 180 
days preceding 
injury 
 
- All required except: 
o Number of opioid 
prescriptions in 30 
days preceding 
injury 
o Number of 
pharmacies 
dispensing opioids 
to decedent in 180 
days preceding 
injury 
o Number of doctors 
writing opioid 
prescriptions to 
decedent in 180 
days preceding 
injury 
- None 
IPV 
 
- None - None - None 
CFR 
 
- None - None - None 
===== Page 269 =====
 
  269 | Page  
Section 13: Appendices  
NARRATIVES GUIDANCE 
C/ME narrative - Per the NVDRS coding 
manual guidance, with 
the following 
exceptions: 
o Alternative wording 
can be used to 
describe the 
decedent (i.e., 
“decedent,” “D”) in 
addition to 
“Victim,” “V” 
o Dates related to the 
injury, death, and 
last seen alive can 
be included in 
narrative to help 
verify dates of 
injury/death/last 
seen alive 
o If LE information is 
available, it should 
be included in the 
C/ME narrative 
- Per the NVDRS coding 
manual guidance 
- Per the NVDRS coding 
manual guidance 
LE narrative - Not required and 
should be left blank; if 
LE report is available, 
information should be 
captured in the C/ME 
narrative (i.e., only 
write one narrative) 
- Per the NVDRS coding 
manual guidance 
- Per the NVDRS coding 
manual guidance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
===== Page 270 =====
 
  270 | Page  
Section 13: Appendices  
2. Timelines for data entry (Please consult your respective Funding Opportunity Announcement for 
specific dates) 
 
SUDORS-only cases 
Unintentional drug 
overdose deaths 
SUDORS and NVDRS 
cases* 
Drug overdose deaths 
of undetermined 
intent 
 
NVDRS-only cases 
Suicides 
Homicides 
Legal intervention 
deaths 
Unintentional 
firearm deaths 
Deaths of 
undetermined intent 
other than drug 
overdose deaths 
Case 
initiation 
- At minimum, within 6 
months of the end of 
the reporting period† 
- Within 4 months of the 
date of death 
(corresponding to NVDRS’ 
earlier case initiation) 
- Within 4 months of the 
date of death 
Data entry 
completion 
- At minimum, within 8 
months of the end of 
the reporting period† 
- SUDORS-required fields 
only: At minimum, within 8 
months of the end of the 
reporting period for fields 
required by SUDORS† 
- NVDRS-required fields 
(including LE fields): Within 
16 months of the calendar 
year of death for fields 
required only by NVDRS 
- Within 16 months from 
the calendar year of 
death 
*Only entered once in the web-based system, but within scope of both SUDORS and NVDRS  
†SUDORS reporting periods are 6 months long, representing the first half (January–June) and second 
half (July–December) of each funded year. Some grantees committed to faster initiation and completion 
timelines; but the minimum requirements are listed here. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
===== Page 271 =====
 
  271 | Page  
Section 13: Appendices  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
----END OF CODING MANUAL---- 
 
