===== Page 1 =====
CDC’s National Violent Death Reporting 
System (NVDRS) & Law Enforcement 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s National Violent Death Reporting System (NVDRS) links details 
of violent deaths – the “who, when, where and how” – and shares insights into “why” they occurred. 
NVDRS uses information from law enforcement reports, death certificates, and coroner/medical examiner reports 
(including toxicology) to monitor and characterize violent deaths. NVDRS is the only state-based online 
reporting system that pools data on violent deaths and their circumstances from multiple sources into 
one anonymous database. No personally identifiable information is collected in the web-based system.
We recognize law enforcement’s unique role in the community, and NVDRS allows law enforcement to have a 
more comprehensive view of violent deaths. By partnering with law enforcement, NVDRS can develop a more 
thorough picture of the circumstances that contribute to violent deaths, help law enforcement prioritize 
the use of public safety resources, better understand crime, and in turn help communities implement various 
prevention and educational strategies. The goal of NVDRS is to help create safer, healthier communities.
What information is collected? 
NVDRS includes information from statewide data compiled 
at the national level for these types of cases:
• Suicide
• Homicide
• Deaths of undetermined intent that may have been 
due to violence
• L
egal intervention (excluding executions)
• Unintentional firearm-related deaths
NVDRS collects information on unintentional   
firearm-r
elated deaths to:
• Provide a more complete picture of firearm-related 
deaths in the country
• Inf
orm prevention efforts by improving 
understanding of the circumstances surr
ounding   
these deaths
Trained abstractors enter de-identified information into the 
system according to standardized CDC guidelines. Data 
fields collected in NVDRS include information on:
• Injury characteristics (e.g., how the victim died)
• Demogr
aphics
• Circumstances that preceded or were related to a 
victim’
s death
• Mental health diagnoses
• Toxicology (drugs or poisons in the victim’s system)
• More than 600 other incident characteristics
• Narratives that provide a brief summary of the 
incident based on law enforcement and coroner/
medical examiner reports
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control 
Division of Violence Prevention

===== Page 2 =====
What can NVDRS data do
for law enforcement?
• Provide analyses  that can address 
timely topics and emerging issues
• Reveal patterns of violent deaths 
through geographic analysis (mapping of 
violent death “hot spots”)
• Guide, inform, and help focus 
violence prevention efforts
Leading to…
• Greater understanding of violent 
crime
• More effective deployment  of law 
enforcement
• Better use  of public safety resources
• Stronger, targeted  crime policies
• Healthier, safer  communities
Is the information in 
NVDRS secure? What 
protections are in place?
Since NVDRS data collection began 
in 2003, there have been no reported 
data breaches; nothing has compromised 
the confidentiality or security of the system.  
Participating NVDRS states enter data into an 
encrypted, web-based system. The VDRS states 
submit this information to CDC using the most 
up-to-date security protocols.
Local laws that protect other types of health 
department records, such as communicable 
disease records, also apply to NVDRS files. 
 
How to participate
Law enforcement officers on the frontlines of violent events can provide detailed reports on the incidents they 
handle first-hand. When law enforcement provides thorough details, NVDRS can provide more thorough insights into 
why these violent deaths occurred and how we can work to prevent future violent deaths.
For more information on NVDRS, visit: https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/nvdrs/index.html
NVDRS in Action: NVDRS Informs First 
Responder Suicide Prevention in Colorado
The Colorado VDRS noticed that suicide victims who were first 
responders in Colorado were much more likely to have been 
a veteran than the general population of suicide victims. This 
makes sense given the high rate at which veterans join police, 
security, EMS, and fire services; however, it raises questions about 
what needs veterans may have as they transition from one high-
stress position to another, and suggests the magnitude of this 
need is greater than previously suspected.
As a result of these findings, Colorado has enhanced the 
ManTherapy.org website to include and promote resources 
focused on positive mental and physical health for all active 
military personnel, veterans, and their families.

