===== Page 1 =====
State Unintentional Drug Overdose 
Reporting System (SUDORS)
The Drug Overdose Epidemic Continues to Worsen in the United States
Drug overdose deaths continue to impact our nation and remain a leading cause of injury-related death in the United States. 
The majority of overdose deaths involve opioids. Deaths involving synthetic opioids (largely illicitly made fentanyl) and stimulants 
(such as cocaine and methamphetamine) have increased in recent years. In addition, overdose deaths have accelerated during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. As the worsening and expanding drug overdose epidemic in the United States involves potent synthetic 
opioids, often in combination with other drugs, timely and comprehensive surveillance and evidence-based prevention and response 
strategies remain essential.
SUDORS Provides Comprehensive Information on Drug Overdose Deaths
In 2016, the State Unintentional Drug Overdose Reporting System (SUDORS) began as part of CDC’s Enhanced State Opioid Overdose 
Surveillance (ESOOS) program, to provide comprehensive data on opioid overdose deaths. In 2019, SUDORS expanded to collect 
data on all drug overdose deaths in 47 states and the District of Columbia as part of CDC’s Overdose Data to Action (OD2A) program. 
Each of these 48 funded jurisdictions collects and abstracts data for unintentional and undetermined intent drug overdose deaths 
from death certificates and medical examiner/coroner reports (including scene findings, autopsy reports, and full postmortem 
toxicology findings) for entry into 
a web-based CDC platform that is 
shared with the National Violent 
Death Reporting System (NVDRS).
The overall goals of SUDORS are to: 
1. Better understand the 
circumstances that  
surround overdose deaths.
2. Improve overdose data  
timeliness and accuracy.
3. Identify specific substances 
causing or contributing to 
overdose deaths as well as 
emerging and polysubstance 
overdose trends to help inform 
overdose prevention and  
response efforts.
NV
AK ME
NH VT
WA MN WI MI RI
CTPAOHIN IL
MO KY WV DC MD DE
VANCTNNM UT
OK LA GA
FL
CA
MA
NJ 
MT ND NY
IA SDWY ID
OR CO NE
SCAR KS
AZ MS AL
TXHI
Funded to collect data 
in a subset of counties
Funded to collect data 
from full jurisdiction
Not funded for SUDORS
SUDORS Incorporates Multiple Data Sources
Jurisdictions abstract data from death certificates, medical examiner/coroner reports, and postmortem toxicology results into 
SUDORS. Combined, these sources yield more than 600 data elements. Examples of data elements captured from each source are: 
Death Certificates
• Demographics
• County and state where overdose occurred
• Cause and manner of death
• Other significant conditions contributing  
 to death
• How overdose occurred
• Place of death (e.g., hospital, home)
• Date of death
Medical Examiner/Coroner Reports
• History of prior overdoses
• Treatment for substance use disorder
• Prescription drug misuse or illicit drug  
use history
• Routes of drug administration  
(e.g., injection, smoking)
• Presence of bystanders
• Naloxone administration
Jurisdictions Participating in SUDORS
Postmortem Toxicology
• All drugs detected
• Drugs contributing to death
• Date specimens were collected
SUDORS State Unintentional Drug Overdose Reporting System
===== Page 2 =====
SUDORS Data Are Unique
Multiple methods are used to 
identify drug overdose deaths.
Jurisdictions can use relevant  ICD-10 
cause of death codes  (X40–X44 and 
Y10–Y14), scans of the text-based 
cause of death information , and 
reviews of medical examiner/coroner 
reports to identify unintentional and 
undetermined intent drug overdose 
deaths.
SUDORS includes data on 
the drugs that caused death 
as well as additional drugs 
detected. 
The comprehensive postmortem 
toxicology information in SUDORS offers 
a more thorough picture of what drugs 
were being used at the time of death, 
and of polysubstance use , than is 
available elsewhere.
 
SUDORS data can capture newly 
emerging drugs. 
SUDORS captures information on  
specific drugs rather than just 
drug classes (for example, 
methamphetamine rather than 
psychostimulants with abuse potential). 
Additionally, the SUDORS system is 
flexible, allowing for new drugs to be 
added in real-time as SUDORS staff 
identify them on toxicology reports. 
Together, these capabilities mean that 
SUDORS data can quickly capture newly  
emerging drugs.
 
Data on circumstances and 
scene evidence provide the 
context surrounding the 
overdose death. 
SUDORS data go beyond toxicology and 
demographics to provide a look into 
the life of the decedent (for example, 
medical history, substance use disorder 
treatment history, and criminal justice 
involvement) and describe how the 
overdose death occurred .
SUDORS narratives provide the 
who, what, where, when, and 
why of the overdose death. 
SUDORS staff write a complete 
description for each overdose death 
detailing all components  (such as cause 
of death, circumstances, and toxicology) 
in one place. These narratives provide 
additional context for understanding the 
overdose and supporting information 
on circumstances captured within 
the system (for example, indication 
of “previous drug overdose” in the 
system, and the narrative provides 
context about the timing of the 
previous overdose, drug(s) involved, 
and any treatment received). These 
narratives lend themselves to in-depth 
qualitative analyses of the context and 
circumstances of overdose deaths, which 
can inform prevention efforts.
SUDORS Data Can Be Used for Action
SUDORS data lend themselves to multiple different types 
of analyses because of the richness of the data and the 
different types of information that are collected. 
For example, analyses might focus on trends in deaths 
involving specific drugs over time, comparison of 
circumstances surrounding overdoses  between time 
periods or across decedent demographics, or qualitative 
assessments of overdose context using incident narrative 
text data. As a result, SUDORS data can be used for action 
in the following ways:
Educating partners about location-specific circumstances  
and risk factors.
Alerting health providers, public health professionals,  
medical examiner and coroner offices, and other partners  
of newly emerging drug threats.
Informing drug overdose prevention and response planning 
and strategies using toxicology and circumstance data.
Evaluating  the impact of overdose prevention and  
response efforts.
SUDORS State Unintentional Drug Overdose Reporting System
State and local jurisdictions are increasingly better informed by systems like SUDORS, which presents comprehensive 
information on the characteristics and circumstances surrounding drug overdose deaths to inform prevention and response 
efforts. Find CDC-published reports on how SUDORS data have been used for action on the CDC Drug Overdose MMWR 
Articles Webpage and Journal Articles Webpage.
Learn more about CDC’s Overdose Data to Action program
www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/od2a
